GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEE


The Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on 
Wednesday, June 29, 2016, at 3:00 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh 
Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, 
Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:

Committee							Staff

Chairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding	      Deputy City Attorney Ira Botvinick
Councilor Bonner Gaylord		      Assistant City Manager James Greene
Councilor Russ Stephenson		      Assistant Planning Director Travis Crane
Councilor Dickie Thompson		      Senior Planner Todd Delk
		      Planner II Doug Hill
		      Assistant Planning Administrator Eric Hodge
				
These are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.

Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order at 3:06 p.m.

Item #15-10 Z-6-16 Leesville Road

This item was held for further discussion during the June 15, 2016 Growth and Natural 
Resources Committee.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:

Following the closing of the Public Hearing on June 7, 2016, the conditions of the 
case can be modified until August 6, 2016.  The Planning Commission has 
recommended approval of the amended request by unanimous vote, but in making 
its recommendation requested revisions to conditions, which applicant has 
submitted.  The Northwest Citizens Advisory Council voted support for the 
proposal by split vote (17 in favor, 14 opposed).  This was last discussed by this 
Committee on June 15, 2016. Applicant submitted revised conditions on June 22, 
2016

Planner II Doug Hill presented the information with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  
Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained 
further.

Request to rezone 7.72 acres from R-4 and R-6 to NX-3-CU

Maps
?	Adopted Zoning; and
?	Area Zoning.



Images
?	Aerial view of site;
?	View north from Leesville Road/Lakewood Valley Way intersection;
?	View south ? frontage on Leesville Road;
?	Site frontage on Leesville Road;
?	View south from Ashford Park Drive/Old Leesville Road intersection;
?	View south on Old Leesville Road toward Ashford Park Drive;
?	View west into site from Ashford Park Drive; and
?	View north of site frontage on Old Leesville Road.

Maps
?	Future Land Use; and
?	Urban Form.

Existing vs. proposed zoning


Existing Zoning
Proposed Zoning
Max. Residential
Density:
4.66 DUs/acre
(36 DUs total)
4.66 DUs/acre
(36 DUs total)*
Max. Retail Intensity 
Permitted:
-0-
63,000*
Max. Office Intensity 
Permitted:
-0-
63,000*
*Per conditions

Staff comments:  Z-6-16 conditions (per June 13, 2016 amendments)
?	Condition 5
o	Enforcement of the provision limiting idling of delivery truck engines is 
problematic (no zoning staff members are available during the stated times).
?	Condition 10
o	While the delivery truck condition may be legal due to the specificity of the 
language based on type, it is not advisable, and the applicant would need to follow 
up with Council or NCDOT (depending on street maintenance) to propose and 
implement such limitations.  Approval of such an application is not guaranteed.  
The restrictions may also be counter to delivery operations if NCDOT restricts 
access and movements along Leesville Road to the truck delivery area.  The 
condition probably should say no more than the applicant will apply for truck 
restrictions with the appropriate governing body. 
?	Condition 18
o	Consider amending the condition language as follows:  There shall be a build-to 
measuring between 30? to 100? along that portion of the property?s frontage on 
Leesville Road from the property?s northern-most point of frontage on Leesville 
Road to a point measuring 500? from the property?s northern-most point on 
Leesville Road, as shown on attached Exhibit A.    Within this build-to area, the 
maximum parking depth is a single double-loaded bay of parking between 
Leesville Road and the portion of the building closest to Leesville Road.  The 
building coverage within this build-to area shall be a minimum of 25%.  Trees 
within the build-to area may, at the election of the developer, be designated as tree 
conservation area if such areas otherwise meet the standards of UDO Sec. 
10.2.4.E.2.1 for tree conservation area.  There shall be a public building entrance 
facing Leesville Road.

Proposed conditions (new amendments bolded)
1.	Certain uses prohibited.
2.	Maximum floor area for non-residential uses limited to 63,000 sf; maximum of 36 
dwelling units prescribed; allocation covenant prescribed.
3.	Maximum floor area for a single non-residential building limited to 50,000 sf.
4.	Maximum building height limited to 2 stories/ 40 feet.
5.	Hours of retail sales and truck deliveries, and of delivery engine idling, limited; 
complaints to be directed to Zoning Enforcement.
6.	Pole-mounted lighting fixtures to be of full-cutoff design; maximum height 20 feet.
7.	No commercial use or public entrance to face Old Leesville Road.
8.	No driveway cut allowed from Old Leesville Road; future public street through 
property not required, but pedestrian cross-access to provide from Old Leesville 
Road to parcel.
9.	No solid waste facilities within 50 feet of east lot lines.
10.	No delivery truck access permitted to or from Old Leesville Road [cross-access to north 
further qualified; ?delivery truck? defined].
11.	Wall, with lighting, required along Old Leesville Road frontage, then south past site 
building/ service area; wall height limited; gate access hours and wall screen 
plantings qualified.  
12.	Drive-in or drive-through prohibited.
13.	Solid waste service hours limited.
14.	No building permitted to extend south of Old Leesville Road public right-of-way; 
Exhibit A added to qualify provision.
15.	Tree conservation area specified on southernmost part of site.  [Former Condition 16 
(sidewalk) deleted; duplicated Code.]
16.	Primary building materials specified.
17.	Residence at 9513 Old Leesville Road to be relocated prior to issuance of building 
permit on rezoning site.
18.	On Leesville Road: built-to range, min. setback, max. parking depth, max. building 
coverage within build-to, & primary entrance oriented to street specified?unless 
more restrictive building type build-to standard applies. Tree conservation within 
built-to to be left to developer, provided areas meet UDO Art. 9.1 & Sec. 10.2.4.E.2.i 
standards.

Planner Hill mentioned that the previous condition number 16 was removed since it was found to 
be duplicated in the City Code.  Condition numbers immediately following were shifted as a 
result.

Map:  Cross-access condition eight

UDO Section 8.3.1.3
?	?The access regulations are intended to provide safe and convenient vehicular and 
pedestrian access within developments and between adjacent developments and to lessen 
traffic congestion. Pedestrian, bike and vehicular access should be safe, direct and 
convenient.? 

Comprehensive Plan Analysis
?	Inconsistent with Future Land Use Map (Office & Residential Mixed Use).  Site not 
addressed by Urban Form Map.
?	Consistent policies:
o	LU 1.3 ? Conditional Use Consistency;
o	LU 5.1 ? Reinforcing the Urban Pattern;
o	LU 5.2 ? Managing Commercial Development Impacts;
o	LU 5.4 ? Density Transitions;
o	LU 5.6 ? Buffering Requirements;
o	LU 6.2 ? Complementary Uses and Urban Vitality; and
o	LU 7.5 ? High-Impact Commercial Uses.
?	Inconsistent policies:
o	LU 1.2 ? Future Land Use Map and Zoning Consistency; and
o	LU 10.6 ? Retail Nodes.

Recommendations
?	Planning Commission:  Recommends approval by unanimous vote, but with conditions 
to be amended.
o	While the proposal is inconsistent with the Future Land Use map of the 
Comprehensive Plan, it is consistent with most pertinent policies of the 
Comprehensive Plan (e.g., density transitions, buffering; complementary uses).
o	The proposed rezoning is reasonable and in the public interest.  Rezoning would 
permit added provision of goods and services near existing residential 
development.  Case conditions serve to mitigate potential development impacts.
o	The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area.  Conditions aim to reduce 
development intensity (e.g., limiting density, square footage & building height) 
and impacts (e.g., prohibited uses, restricted lighting, enhanced buffers). 
?	NOTE: In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission requested revisions to 
conditions.  With the closing of the Public Hearing on June 7, those revisions could come 
forward, and were included in the Committee?s agenda materials. 
?	Northwest CAC:  Supports proposal by split vote (Y- 17, N- 14, on 4/12/16).                     

Planner Delk recommended clarification on some wording within the conditions.  Noting that a 
Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) has already been completed, he stated that it is easy to plan for 
safe and convenient pedestrian access.  He mentioned that the City should look at language to 
make the pedestrian passageway bigger than what is required.  The current standard is a 10-foot 
sidewalk with a 20-foot easement, which could cause issues with cut-through traffic. 
Councilor Stephenson asked Planner Delk to describe the traffic challenges.  Planner Delk 
responded that one intersection is operating at Level F service and there is not a lot of room for 
additional improvements.  He added that a number of improvements are underway in 
coordination with the nearby school site.  With these improvements, the traffic level has barely 
been degraded from a Level D service.  He clarified with Councilor Stephenson that future 
school traffic was considered in this calculation.

Councilor Stephenson asked if the primary access to the subject site would be from Leesville 
Road.  Planner Delk responded that although the City has not seen a site plan, it can be assumed; 
however, the City cannot consider what the North Carolina Department of Transportation 
(NCDOT) would approve until a full site plan has been completed.  Councilor Stephenson 
expressed concern that a TIA would not be accurate until the full site plan is completed.  He 
asked if additional improvements to the intersection would improve its Level F service.  Planner 
Delk responded that the level of service would not improve since there will be no additional 
receiving traffic lanes constructed.  

Chairperson Crowder identified members of the audience that wished to speak.  She then invited 
Attorney Michael Birch to the podium.

Attorney Michael Birch of Morningstar Law Group, 630 Davis Drive, Suite 200, Morrisville, NC 
27560, spoke on behalf of the applicant and handed out the revised conditions.  He then spoke on 
several transportation related items.  He noted that since the plat is recorded, the corresponding 
offer of cross access must be accepted.  Cut-through traffic is an issue that currently exists, and 
an agreement with Draymoor Manor has been established to help address the issue.  He added 
that there are comments in the TIA that clearly direct the applicant to provide additional storage 
area onto Leesville Road.

He confirmed that the conditions require pedestrian access through the surrounding property wall 
onto the Old Leesville Road.  He added that he anticipates having access points with a sidewalk 
on Leesville Road.  The width of this access can be increased in the condition.

Planner Delk noted that staff was not concerned about the location of the gate access on the wall; 
however, the City wishes to stick with the Street Design Manual as much as possible so that fair 
accommodations are offered to everyone.  In efforts of fairness, staff wants the applicant to offer 
10-foot paved walkways and connect them to existing access easements on the site to the north.  
Councilor Stephenson asked what is required to build a five to six-foot sidewalk and a 10-foot 
passage.  Planner Delk responded that the standards require a 10-foot paved walkway on a 20-
foot pedestrian access easement.

Attorney Birch mentioned that the applicant is flexible on the width of the sidewalk.  In lieu of 
providing a 20-foot wide public access easement, the applicant is willing to not have buildings in 
that area.

City Attorney Ira Botvinick asked about the intended walkers on the pedestrian walkway.  
Attorney Birch responded that the intended walkers are people accessing the site through 
Leesville Road.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that this would require an access easement, 
or else it would be considered trespassing.  Attorney Birch responded that the people would not 
be trespassing, but visiting the property.  City Attorney Botvinick stated that this pedestrian 
walkway would connect to the cross access easement, which would include access for vehicles 
and pedestrians.  If a person were to travel down Leesville Road and cut through to get to 
Strickland Road, they would no longer be an invitee.  Attorney Birch added that the applicant 
could connect the sidewalks to the Walgreens sidewalks.  City Attorney Botvinick mentioned 
that from a functional point of view, an internal passageway is not necessary for walking.  
Attorney Birch responded that the applicant can grant a public access easement over the 
sidewalk.

Councilor Stephenson asked if based on City Attorney Botvinick?s perception of easement, 
would the applicant need to provide pedestrian access.  Planner Delk responded that this is the 
Council?s choice.  He added that the general idea from staff is that the access should be used by 
everyone, whether they are walking or driving.  Without an access easement it would be 
considered trespassing.  An access easement would also prevent someone from blocking off this 
access since it would be considered a public amenity.  City Attorney Botvinick agreed, starting 
that the goal should be fair treatment to anyone accessing the site.

Attorney Birch highlighted the remaining new conditions and revisions since the last Committee 
meeting.

?	Condition number five:  Complaints should not be directed to the 9-1-1 emergency 
number.
?	Condition number 11:  The wall along Old Leesville Road will be built with wall mortar.  
In addition to shrubs and trees, the applicant has committed to planting trees along the 
wall in order to further soften the wall onto Old Leesville Road.
?	Condition number 18:  Along Leesville Road, the applicant wants to impose a build-to.  
In exchange for this allowance, there will be limited parking within the build-to area and 
a requirement for four public building entrances facing Leesville Road with a minimum 
transparency standard of 35 percent.  He noted that the side of the building will face 
Leesville Road.  General building type standards require minimum transparency; 
however, the applicant is increasing the standards.  He added that the applicant added 
more restrictive wall standards and acknowledged removing trees along the thoroughfare.  
There would be a requirement of six shade trees, five understory trees, and 200 shrubs.  
There will be trees along Leesville Road.

Attorney Birch mentioned that any technical questions can be answered by his staff present 
today.

Councilor Stephenson asked for clarification on the location of the surrounding wall.  Attorney 
Birch responded that it will go down Leesville Road and behind the development.  Councilor 
Stephenson expressed concern with the material of the walls.  Councilor Gaylord asked 
Councilor Stephenson if he would prefer non Concrete Masonry Unit (CMU) materials.  
Councilor Stephenson responded that he would prefer either brick or non-architectural CMU.

Councilor Gaylord stated that he understood the concern; however, given the nature of the site 
and that the neighbors have come to an agreement with the applicant, he would approve of this 
case.

Councilor Stephenson stated that up until this point, his understanding was that there was no 
Level F traffic service northbound of Leesville Road.  Attorney Birch responded that initially the 
applicant had proposed signal timing.  Following the construction of a right turn lane onto 
Strickland Road by Walgreens, City staff did not advise adding signaled timing. 

Jerry Cram, 13224 Ashford Park Drive, stated that he is President of the Home Owner?s 
Association (HOA) at Draymoor Manor.  He mentioned that the overwhelming majority of 
residents are in favor of this development.  There will be a gate in the wall for pedestrian access, 
primarily for Draymoor Manor homeowners.  He noted that the neighbors did have a concern 
about the gate being left open at all times; however, the developer has agreed to lock  the gate at 
11:00 p.m. each night and reopen it each morning.  Mr. Cram added that the applicant has been 
very accommodating to the neighborhood.  Out of 112 residents, he has heard from three who are 
opposed during a non-formal vote.  He stated that he has been inundated with over 100 emails on 
the topic over the past month in favor of the development and two in opposition.  The HOA 
board is unanimously in favor of the development and is willing to coordinate a formal vote if 
necessary.  He added that neighbors believe that their property value will increase with this 
development.

Councilor Thompson stated that a typical HOA would use a formal voting process for an issue 
such as this.  Mr. Cram assured Councilor Thompson that this development is something that the 
neighbors are in favor of.

Allan Johnston, 13327 Ashford Park Drive, expressed his opposition to the project.  He read 
from a pre-typed statement, which he handed out to the Committee prior to speaking.  He also 
mentioned that he is under the impression that Old Leesville Road is a City maintained road 
rather than a NCDOT maintained road.  The remaining verbatim statement can be found below.

Gail and I wish to share our concerns as to the rezoning of the Leesville property.  
We attended the June 7th hearing but for health reasons were not able to wait 
through the other hearings to speak that evening.  I hold a Master of City Planning 
degree from Georgia Tech; served some years ago as Planning Director for 
Greensboro, North Carolina and as Planning Director and then as Public Works 
Administrator for DeKalb County, Georgia in metro Atlanta.  I served for almost 
three years as President of the Draymoor Manor HOA.  During that time I 
appeared before the Planning Commission and City Council to support the 
rezoning for the new Walgreens and each time expressed our concerns for the 
area:  no commercial south of Walgreens; no non-residential traffic on Old 
Leesville; and the need for an area study for the Leesville/Strickland area.  Until 
recently, Draymoor held this view was to all rezoning suggestions for the 
property.

New leadership at Draymoor changed that position, feeling that some change was 
inevitable.  While we opposed such rezoning, I helped the HOA, Michael Birch, 
and Halpern Enterprises with development of the conditions now included on the 
application, feeling if the zoning was approved by the Council, we at least would 
have the conditions to mitigate the negative impacts.  Our concerns are these:

?	Appropriate land use.  Zoning is the means by which the Council affects 
its land use policy and in this case the Future Land Use Map calls for 
office and institutional or moderate density residential uses.  That is far 
more compatible with existing uses than driving a ?wedge? of commercial 
use into our neighborhood.  This paramount policy supersedes all others.
?	Traffic.  The TIA shows the grocery store and mall/shops will generate an 
additional 6,500 trips per day on Leesville that now carries about 29,000 
Vehicles Per Day (VPD), or an increase in traffic of about 22 percent.  The 
developer?s plans and TIA show the primary access on Leesville will 
allow both North and South movements into and out of the site, with a 
caution notice in the TIA itself that a traffic signal may be required.  This 
TIA says ?signals elsewhere will most likely provide gaps for southbound 
entry and southbound exits??  We suggest, do not take a chance on most 
likely.  Many residents have expressed concern that such unlimited access 
without a signal will set up accidents waiting to happen, with limited sign 
distances and traffic moving at 45 miles per hour (MPH).  The TIA also 
shows the deterioration of level of service at certain locations and certain 
hours of the day from the new middle school and the proposed grocery 
store to be a Level F.  There are concerns about cross traffic from the 
grocery store on the Walgreens and Dillard property to Strickland that 
have not been fully addressed, and our neighbors in Springdale Estates are 
concerned about cut-through traffic in their neighborhood.  
?	Conditions.  The fact that such numerous conditions are needed shows the 
negative aspects to be expected from a commercial use such as a grocery 
store upon an adjoining residential neighborhood.  The noise of cars and 
trucks, the sounds of dumpsters in use and trash trucks collecting waste, 
and the sound of heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) 
systems cannot be eliminated or even well-reduced.  Some conditions will 
be almost impossible of enforcement.  In our case, it appears that the 
Draymoor Board has agreed to accept the negative aspects of mall and 
store operations in exchange for having the developer install community 
gates to stop cut-through traffic.  Yet if the side is not rezoned there would 
be far less such traffic anyway.
?	Use transitions.  For the reasons described above, this case clearly shoes 
the need for better transition land uses from residential to non-residential 
uses.  A high wall and a modest tree buffer are not a sufficient separation 
of uses.

Some have questioned that lack of opposition to the rezoning.  The fact is there 
has been and is such opposition.  The vote at the Citizens Advisory Council 
(CAC) meeting, deferred from a prior one with many more in attendance, was 17 
for and 14 against.  Most of the 17 were from Draymoor Manor, most of the 14 
were from Springdale Estates.  Many folks in the area are among the ?silent 
majority? who assume that with the immediately adjoining Draymoor 
neighborhood supporting the request that their concerns will not be recognized.  I 
would suggest that our citizens in general expect the Council to act on the basis of 
proper planning principles and not on the degree of support for or opposition to 
the request.  So I will close by asking this Committee and through it the Council 
to view the broader land use and traffic issues and decide, as if there were no 
proponents or opponents, how would you vote?

Attorney Birch stated that he has been working with Draymoor Manor for two and a half years.  
Conversation has been happening for some time, including eight to 10 CAC meetings.  There has 
been significant conversation and communication between the applicant and neighbors in the 
area.  He added that during the last CAC meeting, the people in opposition lived in a 
neighborhood further south and had not been engaged at all for the previous two and a half years.  
Attorney Birch pointed out that the TIA shows the morning peak hour to be the worst at the 
intersection as the middle school just opened.  The proposed land uses do not put traffic on the 
ground in that morning peak hour.  In fact, the Future Land Use map calls for office and 
apartments, which would add more traffic to the morning peak hour.  The conditions are a 
product of being engaged with neighbors.

Planner Delk verified that Old Leesville Road, as related to the subject site, is currently 
maintained by NCDOT.  He added that the City?s maintenance map mistakenly shows it as a 
private road.  This is because the portion on the right of way was abandoned when the new 
Leesville Road was built.  The City has confirmed with NCDOT that Old Leesville Road is part 
of the State road system.

Chairperson Crowder stated that based on today?s conversation, she would like for the applicant 
to speak with staff regarding condition number eight.  She suggested the applicant come back at 
the next meeting.  Assistant Planning Director (APD) Travis Crane mentioned that all changes 
need to be made by July 7, 2016.  The applicant has good direction from the Committee; 
however; the conditions must be altered, signed, and submitted before July 7, 2016 in order to 
return at the July 13, 2016 Growth and Natural Resources Committee meeting.

COUNCILOR GAYLORD DEPARTED THE MEETNING AT 4:10 P.M.

There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved to hold item Z-6-16 ? 
Leesville Road in Committee.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Stephenson and 
carried by a vote of 4-0.  Councilor Gaylord was absent but not excused.
Item #15-11 TC-5-16 ? New Bern-Edenton NCOD:  Townhouses 

This item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the June 21, 2016 
City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:

Proposed text change to amend Section 5.4.3.F.9. of the UDO, New Bern ? 
Edenton Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District (NCOD), to add provisions 
for fee-simple townhouse lots within portions of the NCOD that are zoned for 
Mixed-Use along the New Bern/Edenton corridor.  The UDO currently allows 
several forms of multi-unit living in the subject area including apartment building 
types and townhouse building types (in condominium form or under common 
ownership to be rented as an apartment).  This change would allow for fee-simple 
ownership of each individual townhouse unit which is currently made difficult by 
a requirement for 30? wide lots in the NCOD and a requirement that individual 
lots be at least 4,000SF in area.  In a fee-simple ownership format, each 
townhome would sit on its own lot.  Feesimple townhouse units less than 30? in 
width and less than 4,000 SF in size are currently prohibited by this provision of 
the NCOD.

Assistant Planning Administrator (APA) Eric Hodge presented the item with the assistance of a 
PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following 
information that he explained further.

New Bern ? Edenton Neighborhood
a.	Minimum lot size:  4,000 square feet.	
b.	Minimum lot frontage:  30 feet.
c.	Front yard setback:  Minimum of 10 feet, maximum of 25 feet.
d.	Side yard setback:  Minimum of 0 feet when minimum building separation is met.
e.	Building separation:  Minimum of 10 feet.
f.	Maximum building height: 35 feet.
g.	A Townhouse on a site  zoned for a  Mixed Use  District that has frontage on either New 
Bern Avenue or Edenton Street or that is located between New Bern Avenue and Edenton 
Street must also meet the following:
i.	Minimum site size: 4,000 square feet.
ii.	Minimum site frontage: 30 feet.
iii.	Minimum lot frontage of 16 feet.
iv.	Front yard setback: Minimum of 10 feet, maximum of 25 feet.
v.	Side yard setback: Minimum of 0 feet when minimum building separation is met.   
vi.	Building separation: minimum of 10 feet except interior townhouse side yards. 
vii.	Maximum building height: 35 feet.

Images
?	Aerial view of site indicating NCOD area; and
?	Base Zoning Districts for area under discussion:  RX, OX, NX, and DX.

Comparison

Characteristic
Current 
NCOD 
Standard
Predominant 
Character (>75%) 
Entire NCOD
Predominant
Character (>75%)
Text Change Subarea
Proposed Text Change 
applicable to Text 
Change Subarea
Lot size 
(minimum)
4,000 sq. 
ft.
4,160 sq. ft.
4,440 sq. ft.
No minimum
Lot frontage 
(minimum)
30 feet
46 feet
46 feet
16 feet

Chairperson Crowder clarified the allowable uses with the proposed zoning.  Potential uses could 
include gas stations, apartments, condos, office space, and retail.

Councilor Stephenson asked how many parcels would be affected and if the affected property 
owners had voted.  APA Hodge responded that approximately five blocks would be affected and 
there had not been a vote.  Later in the meeting, he mentioned that exactly 124 parcels would be 
affected.  The City did hold a neighborhood meeting and a letter was sent to all property owners 
explaining the proposal.  Should this item be sent to public hearing, each property owner would 
receive a letter notifying them via first class mail.

Isabel Mattox, P.O. Box 946, representing Stuart Cullinan of Five Horizons Development, began 
speaking about the proposed text change.  She stated that Mr. Cullinan lives within this NCOD 
and has developed several small properties in the area.  This text change would create a special 
section for townhouses.  This would encourage more density to support transit and 
homeownership.  She believes that townhouses will lead to more affordable homes and serve the 
middle class.  Middle income citizens, for instance couples or roommates who make a combined 
income of $65,000-$80,000 per year, do not have much ability to own a home due to high 
property costs in the area.  She provided letters of support from CASA and the Downtown 
Housing Improvement Corporation (DHIC) to the Committee.

Applicant Stuart Cullinan, 310 Heck Street, stated that he moved to Raleigh in 2005.  A lot has 
changed since he first arrived in Raleigh, particularly in this NCOD.  He stated that there is a 
?missing middle.?  When a person owns a condo, they don?t own the land.  Condos are typically 
more expensive to finance for the buyer, are much more difficult to sell, and depreciate quickly.  
His goal is to expand homeownership opportunities and support the vibrant and growing 
community.

Councilor Stephenson stated that he had correspondence with citizens opposed to the project.  He 
asked Mr. Cullinan why he wouldn?t just remove his property from the NCOD and not affect the 
other 123 parcels.  Mr. Cullinan responded that there is strong support and this is a ?common 
sense? thing to do.  He added that he has evaluated only changing his property; however, this 
would create pushback from this neighborhood and every other NCOD and would create spot 
rezoning.  His hope is that providing a homeownership option that does not currently exist would 
be embraced by all.  Councilor Stephenson stated that it would be easier if there was a concrete 
understanding that everyone was on board.  He expressed concern with making decisions for 
large groups of people without knowing where they stand.  Chairperson Crowder stated that a 
public hearing would serve that purpose.  Mr. Cullinan mentioned that he has been to all NCODs 
since October but has not asked for a vote.  

Chairperson Crowder stated that the Committee should decide if this is a viable option and then 
send to public hearing for public input.  APA Hodge mentioned that the zoning would not be 
changed for the 124 parcels, but rather the regulations.

Councilor Thompson stated that he agreed with both sides.  He expressed concern that changing 
124 parcels of property affects a lot of people.  He agreed with Chairperson Crowder that the 
Committee can receive more public input from a public hearing.  Ms. Mattox emphasized that 
carving out a portion of the NCOD would be met with opposition.

Councilor Stephenson stated that a nearby neighbor, Michael Sutton, brought forward a creative 
compromise.  He asked the applicant what he thought about the proposal.  Mr. Cullinan 
responded that Mr. Sutton did not understand the particular setback constraints.  Councilor 
Stephenson responded that Mr. Sutton?s point is that the proposed model could create very large, 
block-long, single, and connected buildings.  He added that rather than making this particular 
area more profitable, maybe the City should look at the entire NCOD.

Chairperson Crowder stated that although Mr. Sutton provided a good proposal, all of his 
suggestions cannot be dealt with in the NCOD.  APA Hodge mentioned that the Planning 
Commission recently came forward with recommended changes, some of which address Mr. 
Sutton?s suggestions.

Erin Sterling Lewis, 1229 Courtland Drive, stated that she is an architect and former Planning 
Commission member.  She mentioned that most of the residential development is high rises or 
condos, which have a large impact on the surrounding area.  She had the opportunity to work on 
a townhome project and spoke as a testament to its success.  In her opinion, townhomes are a 
development that the City does not see enough of.  With the project she worked on, all 
townhomes were sold within a week.  Many people have requested more townhomes.  She added 
that if she were looking to buy a home right now, she would be looking for something like this.  
The public has an opportunity to provide input during the next step in the process.  She spoke in 
favor because the proposal is one of the least self-serving proposals she has seen.  This project 
supports a bigger issue in a growing area of the City and she believes it is wise to move forward 
with deeper discussion.

John Schlimme, 705 East Edenton Street, stated he has not heard any opposition to this proposal 
from any of his neighbors.  He has reviewed the designs and believes they are very nice.  Mr. 
Schlimme has seen Mr. Cullinan?s past work in the area and believes the projects have enhanced 
the community.

Glenn Lindsay, 701 East Edenton Street, stated he has known Mr. Cullinan for eight years and is 
aware of his high quality, reasonably priced projects.  He appreciates his work and believes the 
buildings would be an asset to the neighborhood.
Dan Coleman, 517 Rock Quarry Road, expressed concern with affordability.  Although he 
believes staff provided an excellent report and analysis, he stated Mr. Cullinan has not 
committed to a price cap.  He stated that this is simply a chance to move real estate on a ?hot 
market.?  He expressed further concern that townhomes are not a popular building type in the 
community.

Councilor Stephenson confirmed the area that Mr. Coleman lives in and asked why the CAC did 
not take a vote on this project.  Mr. Coleman responded that the issue was not brought forward as 
a vote; however, the CAC did request guarantees on affordable housing from Mr. Cullinan.

Chairperson Crowder mentioned that she has read Mr. Sutton?s letter and has not had a chance to 
speak with him.  In his letter, Mr. Sutton pointed out that the City does not currently have a 
standard for building setbacks.  She requested for staff to craft language for a 20-foot setback 
adjacent to alleys.  She also requested staff to work with the applicant on any outstanding issues 
or concerns.

Chairperson Crowder made a suggestion to leave the item in Committee since Councilor 
Thompson needed to leave the meeting and Councilor Gaylord had already departed.  
Additionally, not all Committee members have had an opportunity to read Mr. Sutton?s letter.  
Councilor Thompson agreed and moved to hold item TC-5-16 ? New Bern-Edenton NCOD 
Townhouses in Committee.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Stephenson and carried by a 
vote of 4-0.  Councilor Gaylord was absent but not excused.

Adjournment.  There being no further business Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting 
adjourned at 5:00 p.m.


Cassidy R. Pritchard
Assistant Deputy Clerk 
	Growth and Natural Resources Committee	
	June 29, 2016





Page 13 of 13


