GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEEThe Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on Wednesday, July 27, 2016, at 3:00 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:Committee							StaffChairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding	      Deputy City Attorney Ira BotvinickCouncilor Russ Stephenson		      Assistant City Manager James GreeneCouncilor Dickie Thompson		      Kenneth Bowers, City Planning Director		      Assistant Planning Administrator Eric Hodge		  				These are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order at 3:04 p.m.  All Committee members were present except for Councilor Bonner Gaylord, who was absent and excused.Item 15-05 UDO Height Limits and Building Setbacks - ConcernsThis item was held for further discussion during the July 13, 2016 Growth and Natural Resources (GNR) Committee.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:On July 13th, the GNR Committee directed staff to look into considering a side and rear setback requirement for driveways and parking areas in the R-1, R-2, R-4, R-6 and R-10 zoning districts.  A recommended 3.5 foot side and rear yard setback for vehicular surface areas is proposed.If the Committee wishes to address any of these concerns, a text change to the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) would be required.Assistant Planning Administrator (APA) Eric Hodge presented the information with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Driveway and Parking Areas:  SetbacksAPA Hodge mentioned that Section 8.3.5.C.2.e. of the UDO states that driveways must be located a minimum of 3.5 feet from the side lot line; however, a driveway may be located on the lot line closer than 3.5 feet if it is shared with an adjacent lot.  Staff has interpreted that this regulation only applies to the apron of the driveway where it meets the street.  He added that staff could change their interpretation of this regulation to apply to the entirety of the driveway; however, parking areas aren’t always considered part of the driveway and are regulated separately depending on the building-type on the lot.    Parking SetbacksAPA Hodge noted that these setbacks could be applied to all or some of the following uses allowed in Residential Districts (R-1 through R-10):  * Detached House:  Currently not specified in UDO;* Attached House:  Currently not specified in UDO;* Townhouse:  Zero feet or three feet side/three feet rear (could have a peripheral standard applied edge of the townhouse development);* Apartment:  Zero feet or three feet side/three feet rear;* Civic Building:  10 feet in R-1 through R-4, six feet in R-6 and R-10; and* Open Lot:  10 feet in R-1 through R-4, seven feet in R-6 and 5 feet in R-10.He added that if there is a desire to modify some or all of these standards, the Committee would need to determine if is there a desire to treat all of these building types similarly in Mixed-use districts.Chairperson Crowder clarified the setback requirements.  She stated that since this has been identified as a problem, the Council needed to find a resolution.  She suggested asking staff to research driveway setbacks further and return to the Committee.  APA Hodge stated that staff is comfortable with a 3.5 foot setback.  He noted that placing a similar restriction on driveways could be onerous.  Chairperson Crowder responded that a good design always allows for a setback.Councilor Thompson asked where shared driveways are allowed under design classifications.  APA Hodge responded that it is allowed under all classifications and is common in commercial settings.  He mentioned that shared driveways were more common in older residential context; however, the current code encourages and allows it.Councilor Stephenson asked if this would be an opportunity to ask the Board of Adjustment for a variance.  He mentioned that Saunders Street has tiny houses and driveways.  APA Hodge responded that the Dorothea Commons neighborhood has a similar layout, which was approved since it was all planned out from the beginning.Chairperson Crowder moved to ask staff to research 3.5 foot setbacks on vehicular structures, including driveways and parking pads, and to bring the recommendations back to the Committee.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Thompson and carried by a vote of 3-0.  Councilor Gaylord was absent and excused.Councilor Stephenson asked staff if the City should leave the rules as they are for mixed use districts.  APA Hodge responded that there are no setback requirements for building types (other than vehicular structures) that could occur.  He noted that mixed use districts typically come with other sets of regulations.Attorney Botvinick stated that direct abutting commercial uses with residential zoning districts are already regulated.  APA Hodge responded that 3.5 feet would accommodate the ability to open a car door and stay within the property line.  This setback would also allow for landscaping and separation between neighboring driveways.Item 15-12 Side Yard Setbacks – R-4 and R-6 Zoning DistrictsThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the July 19, 2016 City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:Adequacy of Side Yard Setbacks:  R-4 and R-6 Zoning Districts.  If the Committee wishes to address these concerns, a text change to the UDO would be required.APA Hodge presented the item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.R-4 and R-6 SetbacksAPA Hodge stated that the pre-UDO standards have been in place at least since the 1991 reformatting of the code, and likely long before.  He added that there have been no changes in the minimum side yard setback regulations as a result of adopting the UDO.Type of SetbackPrevious R-4UDO R-4Previous R-6UDO R-6Side10 feet10 feet5 feet5 feetAggregate Side20 feet20 feet15 feet15 feetCorner Side (Pre 1991 Street)20 feet15 feet10 feet10 feetCorner Side (Post 1991 Street)20 feet15’10 feet10 feetThe R-1 and R-2 zoning districts contain the same side yard setbacks as R-4.  The R-10 setbacks are similar to the R-6 district in that they both have a five-foot minimum; though R-10 zoning district does not require a 15 foot aggregate but instead has a sum of side yard setbacks of 10 feet.  He noted that pre-UDO R-10 also required a 15 foot aggregate.APA Hodge mentioned that a 2008 Residential Infill construction study revealed at least 60% of the land zoned R-4 and R-6 exceeded the minimum lot size requirement.  This study noted that the density of approximately 1,800 acres of land zoned R-6 located inside the beltline was 1.9 units per acre.  This equates to an average lot size of over 22,700 square feet in size, which is almost three times the minimum required lot size for the R-6 zoning.  He added that these neighborhoods may be candidates for downzoning to a more reflective base district or perhaps may wish to initiate Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts (NCODs) that carry regulations more representative of the built environmental characteristics that are predominate to the neighborhood.Chairperson Crowder asked staff if a five-foot setback physically leaves enough room during a construction project.  APA Hodge responded that it is possible; however, not every developer will be respectful of the neighboring space.  He noted that smaller one to two story properties should have no problem since there are districts in downtown with zero-foot setbacks.Chairperson Crowder asked if the City has language for a more robust fencing requirement in order to prevent intrusion onto neighboring properties.  APA Hodge responded that stormwater regulations may address some of these issues.  He noted that typically, stormwater regulations only address runoff going downhill.  Chairperson Crowder confirmed with APA Hodge that the UDO does not require fencing to determine lineation between properties during construction.  In response to APA Hodge, she stated that there needs to be some sort of UDO requirement to prevent constant issues and hardship for property owners.  Attorney Botvinick stated that the City cannot monitor off-site sedimentation onto adjoining properties.  He noted that there are certain thresholds that the City does not require grading permits for.  In most cases, large developments would be covered by a silt fence.  In the case of a development less than 12,000 square feet, the City could establish a regulation to set up a fence in order to delineate boundaries between two properties.  Councilor Thompson added that this could be similar to tree-save fencing and could be temporary.APA Hodge asked the Committee how large a parcel would be before this requirement would become applicable.  Councilor Stephenson stated that the build forms are three times the minimum R-4 standards, which leaves a lot of room around dwellings.  He noted that in the future, the City will see citizens building much closer to setback lines.  Councilor Stephenson stated that since land-disturbing activities are getting much closer to property lines, some sort of line delineation should be required.  APA Hodge responded that he would work with staff in Development Services for more guidance on when this regulation would be appropriate.Chairperson Crowder made a motion for staff to bring back potential language for the UDO relating to fencing delineation for parcels less than 12,000 square feet.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Stephenson and carried by a vote of 3-0.  Councilor Gaylord was absent and excused.Chairperson Crowder reiterated that when parcels are unrelated to stormwater issues, the City should have a different regulation.  Councilor Stephenson added that he would like a broad definition of land disturbing activities.  Attorney Botvinick added if the City went with a five-foot perimeter, they are saying that where a land disturbing activity occurs within five feet of a common property line, and no silt fencing is otherwise provided, then a temporary fence would need to be installed.  APA Hodge responded that it will be difficult to place a fence immediately adjacent to where a wall is being constructed.  Sara Wilson, 1016 Canterbury Road, thanked the Committee for their suggestion; however, in a five-foot row, 40-foot building, it is impossible to develop without encroaching on the neighboring property.  Developers need to be on her property in order to install a driveway on her neighbor’s lot line.  She added that fencing needs to be put up since builders have no clue what is going on and stomped her fence down in order to put a sidewalk on her property line.Chairperson Crowder asked APA Hodge again if a five-foot setback would be enough physical room during construction.  APA Hodge responded that prior to Ms. Wilson’s petition, people have been building with those setbacks all over the City.  Ms. Wilson responded that developers have dumped dirt and backed up equipment onto her property.  Chairperson Crowder reiterated her request for staff to develop language requiring fencing.  She asked if there would be penalties, similar to stormwater, if developers continually crossed over fencing.  Attorney Botvinick stated that this is ultimately a civil action trespass.  These cases are handled civilly because trespassing happens constantly and the City does not get involved.  He added that the Committee is suggesting fences in order to make the boundary line clear, which would help property owners prove that it is a trespass.Ms. Wilson responded that the “civil people” turned her back over to the City.  Attorney Botvinick responded that civil matters are between two parties and it is up to the property owner to prevent trespassing.  Ms. Wilson responded that the government is setting people up for failure when they allow a 40-foot structure to be built.  Councilor Thompson stated that even though this issue happens, Ms. Wilson has a situation with the builder instead of the City.  Ms. Wilson said the City allowed the problem to happen since it allowed development to come into an established area and allowed certain companies to work within the City.  Councilor Thompson stated that if a contractor has completed all certifications and passed inspections, it is not the City’s job to police issues and it is a civil matter.  Ms. Wilson responded that the City needs to police the builders more closely if there are multiple complaints.  She noted that there have been others with similar complaints about this particular builder.Councilor Stephenson stated that the Committee is trying to complete an initial recognition for the issue, including making a regulation for clear delineation, possibly even more substantial than a tree fence.  He asked if requesting staff to consider a more substantial silt fence could be tacked onto the recommendation.  Councilor Thompson suggested requiring signage to be posted indicating the property line in multiple languages.  Attorney Botvinick said he would look into that option.Ms. Wilson reiterated that the City is not policing contractors enough.  Councilor Thompson understood her concerns but reiterated that it is not the City’s job to handle complaints pertaining to them.Jennifer Hollar, 2313 Bedford Avenue, stated that it is impossible not to encroach with a five-foot setback.  The City allows bay windows and balconies to come up to property lines so it is a false notion that parcels have a five-foot setback.  She added that she is not willing to pay an attorney $300 per hour to help handle a trespassing concern.Carol Majors, 2607 Cooleemee Drive, stated that she has personal experience with a large house being built on a tiny lot next to her property.  This is why so many neighbors are asking for stronger infill standards.  Developers are pushing the envelope are far as they can.  She asked the Committee to look at infill standards and setbacks and to increase them by 10 to 20 percent for people already invested on properties.  She noted that although encroachment is not intentional, it is happening every day.  For instance, the silt fence on her property was placed one foot over the property line.  Infill standards are worded in such a way that the spirit of the law becomes the action of the builders.  She asked for the Committee to consider automatic protection for existing residents while this issue is open.  Ms. Majors added that her property is now 10 degrees hotter with no room to plant a tree.Chairperson Crowder asked Ms. Majors if she had brought forward a petition.  Ms. Majors responded that she had not; however, she is willing.  Councilor Stephenson clarified with Ms. Majors that in her opinion, the infill standards are not being carried out in the implementation of the UDO.  The troubling property that Ms. Majors is referring to is 2710 Cooleemee Drive.  She added that the house is pretty; however, the developers keep saying what they are doing is legal, despite Ms. Majors being respectful.APA Hodge stated that many lots are oversized per requirements.  He asked the Committee if they had any desire to explore the old infill subdivision.  Councilor Stephenson responded that an alternative would be to build side and rear yards into UDO Section 2.2.7.  APA Hodge expressed his concern about this because these lots did not have consistent widths and by default would have a natural hardship against them.  This would qualify these properties for a variance.Philip Poe, 620 Devereux Street, encouraged more communication between the builder and adjacent property owners.  He mentioned that with zoning cases, there are neighborhood meetings early on.  When issues arise due to communication difficulties it creates an extra burden on City staff.Councilor Stephenson asked staff to send him a copy of the old P.C. Infill Review and asked for comments on how well it worked.  APA Hodge responded that the majority of those infill subdivisions were approved with restrictive covenants that were negotiated with neighbors to resolve concerns about future development.  Councilor Stephenson responded that this is what Mr. Poe was talking about.  Attorney Botvinick stated that the system worked because the Planning Commission had discretion to give developers stipulations for approval. Chairperson Crowder stated that the Committee would need Council approval in order to discuss that type of objective standard.  Attorney Botvinick responded that the Committee has already had discussion about general setbacks and would not have to go back to Council for a more specific discussion since they already have authority.Councilor Stephenson stated that he has heard from multiple neighbors that this standard is not working.  He moved to ask Council to refer residential infill compatibility standards to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee.  The motion was seconded by Chairperson Crowder and carried by a vote of 3-0.  Councilor Gaylord was absent and excused.Ms. Hollar asked the Committee to consider including R-10 zoning districts when within an NCOD.  She noted that NCODs have the same problems that other neighbors have.  Chairperson Crowder mentioned that NCODs trump other standards.  APA Hodge added that currently, side setbacks are not addressed by infill compatibility.Chairperson Crowder asked if the Committee has authority to discuss R-4 and R-6 zoning districts, adding that staff would recommend all of UDO Section 2.2.7. rather than looking at items separately.  Attorney Botvinick responded that Council did not approve discussing R-10.  Chairperson Crowder suggested discussing the topic in a work session.  APA Hodge stated that he is in agreement that something needs to be done about that zoning district since they are all inter-related.  Councilor Stephenson added that the Council does not have citizen input during work sessions so it is difficult to get the full picture.Chairperson Crowder asked if the Committee has authority to ask staff to look at loopholes that may be in the infill standards as they relate to UDO Section 2.2.7.  Attorney Botvinick responded that the Committee does not have authority.  Councilor Stephenson asked if the Committee could ask the Council with support from staff.  Assistant City Manager Jim Greene mentioned that the Council meets next Tuesday and the Committee could ask at that time.City Planning Director (CPD) Kenneth Bowers stated that the City as heard a large number of issues relating to infill development.  He agrees with APA Hodge that the City needs to look at all standards.  He recognized that there will be a large diversity of views.  His main suggestion was for the Committee to specify topics of conversation at some point since the topic could be endless.  He noted that every residential lot is a unique situation and the zoning code has to be objective in order to apply across a variety of situations.Adjournment.  There being no further business Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting adjourned at 4:10 p.m.Cassidy R. PritchardAssistant Deputy Clerk 	Growth and Natural Resources Committee		July 27, 2016Page 2 of 7