GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEEThe Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on Wednesday, April 13, 2016, at 2:00 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:Committee							StaffChairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding		Deputy City Attorney Ira BotvinickCouncilor Bonner Gaylord				Assistant City Manager James GreeneCouncilor Russ Stephenson				Planner I Daniel BandCouncilor Dickie Thompson				Planning Director Ken Bowers									Planner II Doug Hill							Stormwater Program Manager Blair Hinkle				These are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order at 2:09 p.m.The following item was discussed.Item #15-03 – Z-34-13 – Hillsborough Street Conditional Use DistrictThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the April 5, 2016 City Council meeting.  The recommendation is for the Committee to make any additional conditions or amendments and refer back to the Council for action.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:This is a request to rezone 6.4 acres from Residential-4 and Residential-10 (R-4 & R-10) to Residential-10-Conditional Use (R-10-CU). The request was initially submitted in December, 2013, for Commercial Mixed Use-5 stories-Parking Limited (CX-5-PL). A Valid Statutory Protest Petition was filed by adjacent neighbors in January, 2014. Given potential trip generation, a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) was requested by staff. The applicant amended the request on March 31, 2015 to Residential-10 (General Use); with the reduction in the traffic generation, no new TIA was requested. A new Valid Statutory Protest Petition, though, was filed on April 29, 2015. The request was amended on February 24, 2016, during Planning Commission review, to Residential-10 Conditional Use (R-10–CU). Of the two conditions, the first, limiting stormwater runoff, is in response to neighbor concerns regarding the stream which flows across the southwest corner of the site, which has a history of flooding. The second condition stems from staff and Planning Commission note of the site’s location on a section of Hillsborough Street which the Comprehensive Plan identifies as a Transit Emphasis Corridor. The Planning Commission recommends approval of the amended request by unanimous vote. During the Public Hearing of the case on April 5, 2016, discussion considered potential impacts on neighboring properties, centered on stream matters and intensity of possible build-out.Planner II Doug Hill presented this item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Slides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Zoning Case Z-34-13 Hillsborough Street* Request to rezone 6.4 acres from R-10 and R-4 to R-10-CU; and* VSPP filed.Map:  Existing zoningImage:  Aerial viewImages:  Views from East and WestImages:  Single-unit residences to East and West of siteMaps:  Z-34-13 Area Topography/DrainageImage/Map: Z-34-13 area past stormwater complaintsMaps: Future Land Use and Urban FormMap: Future Land Use/CorridorsProposed Conditions* Limitations on peak stormwater runoff specified; and* Transit stop easement to be provided.Existing versus proposed zoningExisting ZoningProposed ZoningResidential Density (max.):6.63 DU/acre(44 DUs max.)9.94 DU/acre(66 DUs max.)Setbacks (min.):Front:Side:Rear:R-10:If Townhouse:10 feet0 or 6 feet20 feetR-4:If Detached:20 feet10 feet30 feetIf Townhouse:10 feet0 or 6 feet20 feetRetail Intensity Permitted:(not permitted)(not permitted)Office Intensity Permitted:  (not permitted)(not permitted)*DU:  Density UnitComprehensive Plan Analysis* Consistent with Future Land Use Map (Community Mixed Use).* Consistent with Urban Form map (Transit Oriented District, Transit Emphasis Corridor, within Transit Stop Half-Mile Buffer).* Consistent policies:o Policy LU 1.2 – Future Land Use Map and Zoning Consistency;o Policy LU 4.8 – Station Area Land Uses;o Policy LU 5.4 – Density Transitions;o Policy LU 6.4 – Bus Stop Dedication; ando Policy LU 7.3 – Single Family Lots on Thoroughfares.* Inconsistent policies:  None identified.Outstanding Issues* Site does not meet UDA maximum block perimeter standard; and* Sewer and fire flow matters may need to be addressed upon development.Recommendations* Planning Commission:  Recommends approval by 8-0 vote.o The proposal is consistent with the Future Land Use Map, Urban Form Map, and pertinent policies of the Comprehensive Plan;o The proposed rezoning is reasonable and in the public interest.  Conditions exceed Code in addressing stormwater runoff, and support transit use on the Hillsborough Street corridor; ando The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area.  Building Type height caps are comparable to those of adjoining properties.  On-site stream course and tree conservation areas will serve to buffer neighboring low-density parcels from site development.  * West CAC: Reviewed case but deferred vote to neighbor meeting held 1/27/16  (Y- 7, N- 1, Abstain- 1); subsequently requested changes would alter tally to Y- 2, N- 4, Abstain- 3.Councilor Stephenson mentioned he recently had the opportunity to drive around the area and there appears to be many septic systems.  Planner Hill responded that the immediate area is all septic and the adjacent area, located in Wake County, uses wells.Chairperson Crowder invited the applicant to speak and provide more information.Principal Engineer Nicole Toma Townsend, of Toma Varnedoe Construction, LLC, 400 Asheville Drive, Suite 200, Cary, NC 27518, introduced herself to the Committee.  She represented her father and grandfather, who have owned the subject property for more than thirty years.  She presented her information with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Slides during this part of the presentation included the following information that she explained further.Map:  Existing ZoningImage:  Survey of SiteEngineer Townsend stated that Stormwater Engineer Daniel McGlamery could not be present at today’s meeting and provided a written statement from him, which was passed out to the Committee during the meeting.  The statement read as follows:Drye McGlamery Engineering, PLLC6117 Hillsborough StreetApril 13, 2016Stormwater Discussion with City of Raleigh – Information gathered from City of Raleigh iMaps* Approximate watershed area draining to rear neighbors: 5516308 SF = 126.6 AC.* Majority of 126.6 AC watershed is densely developed commercial (office buildings, restaurants, retail, and apartment buildings).  A portion of the watershed is dense residential development (lots less than 0.5 acres).* Proposed site is 6.4 AC or roughly 5% of the watershed draining to the rear of the property.* Stormwater measures will be installed to limit post-development runoff rates to pre-development rates (no increase in runoff from new 6117 development).* Additionally, stormwater controls installed for controlling large storm events will likely improve drainage during more frequent small to medium sized rain event due to the installation of an outlet control structure and approved energy dissipation device at the property outfall.Daniel J. McGlamery, PEEngineer Townsend stated that the property to the West and South of the site has serious flooding issues.  This is a result of the 126.6 acres of watershed area draining to the rear side of the property.  The majority of this acreage is densely developed and the 6.4 acres of the subject property only contributes to 5% of the total watershed.After meeting with neighbors in January, Toma Varnedoe Construction decided to add a condition to their rezoning application to design for a 25-year flood event, going above the state mandate of 2 and 10-year events.  The stormwater measures will be installed to maintain the pre-development rates post-development.Additionally, the controls that will be placed for large storm events will improve the drainage during storms and rain due to installation of an outlet control structure and an approved energy dissipation device.  There was at one point a pond in the rear of the property that was dammed up.  During this time, the neighborhood did not experience the flooding issues. She added that although there has been a lot of new development, an installation of an outlet control structure could help to bring the area back to previous conditions.She then addressed the concern regarding surrounding neighborhood septic systems.  The developer’s commitment of no increase in runoff post-development should adequately address this concern.  Furthermore, considering the neighboring property’s septic systems are already in flood-prone soil, and only 5% of the watershed is resulting from the subject property, the impact to the existing septic systems would be marginal, if any at all.She next addressed the neighbors’ concerns regarding the view from their houses being disturbed.  She referenced a map in her PowerPoint presentation with the buffers delineated in red.  She added that the majority of the property will be undisturbed, as there is a 50-foot Neuse River riparian buffer, which runs from the Northwest corner to the Southeast portion of the property.  There will be a large buffer between any development and to the neighbors to the South and West. She showed examples of the proposed project layout.  She noted this plan provides far more of a buffer than any of the surrounding developments have provided, such as Wolf Creek Apartments, which are located to the immediate East of the neighborhood.She concluded by stating that her company believes this rezoning request is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Plan.  This will be beneficial to the community, further development, and improve the neighbors’ flooding concerns.  She emphasized the commitment to communicate with neighbors throughout the process.Councilor Stephenson asked about the current drainage to the stream on the property.  Engineer Townsend responded that the stream is not on their property.  Planner Hill further clarified that the map shows a piped-course running down the western property line and according to iMaps, this stream is on the adjoining property.  Councilor Stephenson responded that regardless, he has noticed flooding in the area each time it rains heavily.Chairperson Crowder provided a speaking opportunity to any neighbors of the subject property.Alvaro Casella, 9105 Fawn Hill Court, referenced his neighboring property, which is located at 5917 Hillsborough Street, on the map.  He conveyed his support, stating that the potential development of this property would be an asset to the area and it compliments other surrounding projects.  He added that the area is “marshy” due to lack of repair and deferred maintenance.  The proposed development will be more aesthetically pleasing than the current state of the property and due to the back side of the property remaining untouched, surrounding neighbors should not be impacted or harmed.Chairperson Crowder stated it was difficult to determine the type of stormwater impact that this proposed development would have on the surrounding properties.  Although there are compelling reasons why the stormwater runoff would be coming from places other than the site of the proposed development, she expressed environmental concerns.  Wondering if there would be a possibility to work with Wake County on mitigating issues, she asked Stormwater Program Manager (SPM) Blair Hinkle for guidance on the topic.SPM Hinkle responded that this could certainly pose as an opportunity to formally foster a relationship with Wake County.  He noted that the proposed condition of a 25-year stormwater event is more protective than the 2 and 10 stormwater event that is currently in place.  Chairperson Crowder asked SPM Hinkle to define a 25-year stormwater event.  SPM Hinkle responded that the peak flow rate coming off of the pre-development site would have to be the same post-development.  The device installed would need to provide some volumetric storage for a short period of time.Councilor Thompson expressed his concern with the increase of traffic on Hillsborough Street, which already is at a high level.  Chairperson Crowder agreed, referencing the North Carolina State law which requires each property site to have an entrance.  Wolf Green Drive is very close to the site of the proposed development.  Referencing maps from the PowerPoint presentation, the Committee discussed the potential layout of the entrances and exits of the proposed development.  Chairperson Crowder asked Planner Hill if there was a possibility to consolidate the entrances and exits of the proposed development with the existing Wolf Creek Apartments.  Planner Hill responded that the points of access depend upon property lines and would need to be addressed in a site plan.Councilor Gaylord asked Planner Hill if the property to the East has an offer of cross access.  Planner Hill responded it does not, adding that at the time of development the focus was on creating an apartment community.  Councilor Gaylord confirmed that as a matter of practice, the City now requires cross access for conditions.  Planner Hill responded that this is part of the City Code; however, if there are existing conditions that need to be taken into account, the code allows for room to address those issues.Councilor Stephenson asked Planner Hill if cross access would be required as part of the site plan review.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that it would only be required if the Committee decided to require it.  The City Code states each developing property has to offer cross access to its adjoining property, meaning there is no need to add conditions relating to cross access.  He added that although this is the case, sometimes the City does not require it because it does not make sense.  Since this is the first property in the area being developed under the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), the property will have to wait until development to offer cross access since the Wolf Green side is already developed and most likely will not come to the City and ask for more development.Councilor Gaylord stated that a reasonable use for this parcel would be an expansion of Wolf Creek Apartments.  He summarized that the Committee is weighing 44 units versus 66 units of traffic, which is an obvious concern.  Another option is the 10-year versus the 25-year stormwater event, meaning there are very distinct tradeoffs.  The Committee must decide between more runoff or more traffic.  He added that if the applicant is willing to entertain the idea of cross access, this would allow for the additional density.  Councilor Thompson agreed.Planner Hill referenced the traffic study worksheet that was provided in the back-up materials for the meeting.  He stated that the expected increase in peak hour trips is only 12 vehicles per hour.  The expected increase in daily trips is 133 vehicles per day.  There was not enough of an increase to merit a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA).Councilor Stephenson stated that he is more concerned about the existing septic systems and wells, considering this is a flood-prone area already.  SPM Hinkle responded with listing two challenges, which are that the drainage infrastructure did not likely contemplate for offsite flow to come through the system and that it is uphill.SPM Hinkle added that besides looking at the stormwater event options, the City could focus more on volumetric control.  He mentioned the idea of a Low Impact Development (LID), which would address the more common storms that Raleigh experiences within a given year.  This would protect the stream versus offering protection from larger storm events.  The two options are not exclusive.  Upon being requested to provide his opinion on the best option, SPM Hinkle responded that he could not provide an answer because they would be protecting against two different issues.  The applicant’s Stormwater Engineer would be the best source for that answer.There being no other questions, Chairperson Crowder asked the Committee to present their final thoughts on the case.Councilor Gaylord stated that this is a tricky case that needs to be looked at in a fair way.  The ideal situation would be for cross access to be established using Wolf Creek Apartments’ driveway due to the traffic safety issue.  He encouraged the applicant to look into cross access, noting that he is leaning more towards additional density if there is a desire to focus that density towards the side access.  He added that the rezoning is improving the stormwater plan.  If all of the items just mentioned are addressed, he is comfortable with moving forward.Councilor Thompson agreed with Councilor Gaylord that the proposed development needs cross access.  He added that he is not inclined to vote before the other issues are addressed.Councilor Stephenson expressed his concern with making a decision considering City staff could not provide a firm recommendation.  He emphasized the need for caution in regard to the neighbors’ well and septic systems.Chairperson Crowder asked Planning Director Ken Bowers if the property could be denser than an R-10 if the case were denied.  Planning Director Bowers responded that if the case were denied, the developers would need to develop each section based off of their corresponding regulations (R-10 and R-4). Chairperson Crowder let the applicant know that this is a difficult case, noting that the adjacent neighbors would be affected.  Traffic continues to be an issue for all Committee members, so she encouraged the applicant to try to obtain cross access in addition to completing a volumetric control study.  She then asked City Attorney Botvinick about the restrictions on asking Wolf Creek Apartments for cross access.City Attorney Botvinick responded that as a rule, if one is not the property owner, one cannot go on the land.  The applicant can speak with the neighboring apartments to see if they are willing to provide cross access; however, it is doubtful due to increased trips and no compensation.  Proposed development is near a future train stop and is consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.  He added that the developer could potentially incentivize cross access.Chairperson Crowder responded with the pros and cons of this rezoning case.  There is an easement that will require a bus shelter to be built and there is a 25-year stormwater event.  She encouraged the applicant to look at volumetric control study.  A negative factor of this proposed development is the potential impact to an already flooded area. She encouraged the applicant to see if cross access with Wolf Green Drive was a possibility.Engineer Townsend responded that volumetric controls can be costly and asked if she needed to commit to this today.  Crowder responded that the Committee did not need an answer today and that Engineer Townsend could come back in two weeks.  Chairperson Crowder also asked for the developer to provide a list of exterior building materials that will be used.City Attorney Botvinick stated that the City will work with the applicant on building materials; however, a recent bill on design controls provides some limitations on what the City can request.There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved to bring this case, item #15-03 – Z-34-13 – Hillsborough Street Conditional Use District, back in two weeks at the April 27, 2016 Growth and Natural Resources Committee meeting.  The motion was seconded by Chairperson Crowder and carried unanimously 4-0.Adjournment.  There being no further business, Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting adjourned at 3:12 p.m.Cassidy R. PritchardAssistant Deputy Clerk	Growth and Natural Resources Committee		April 13, 2016Page 8 of 8