GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEEThe Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on Wednesday, May 11, 2016, at 2:00 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:Committee							StaffChairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding	      Deputy City Attorney Ira BotvinickCouncilor Bonner Gaylord, late arrival		      Assistant City Manager James GreeneCouncilor Russ Stephenson		      Assistant Planning Director Travis CraneCouncilor Dickie Thompson		      Planner II Doug Hill		      Housing & Neighborhoods Director Larry Jarvis		      Interim Public Works Director Rich Kelly				These are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order at 2:04 p.m.  The Committee agreed to rearrange the order of the agenda items.  The items were discussed in the following order:1) Item #15-04 – Moore Square Park Construction Manager at Risk Selection;2) Item #15-08 – Z-4-16 – Oberlin Road Conditional Use District; and3) Item #15-05 – Stone’s Warehouse Project – Change of Contractor.Item #15-04 – Moore Square Park Construction Manager at Risk SelectionThis item was held for further discussion during the April 27, 2016 Growth and Natural Resources Committee.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:In conjunction with the Public Works Department, the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources (PRCR) Department staff and design consultants from Sasaki Associates solicited a Request for Qualifications (RFQ) for a Construction Management At-Risk team for the redevelopment of Moore Square Park.The following information is presented in response to the comments and questions presented at City Council on April 19th and the Growth and Natural Resources Committee on April 27th.  The renovation of Moore Square is not viewed as a typical park project and is therefore seeking approval to proceed with Construction Management at Risk (CMAR). The renovation is not seen as a typical park project for the following reasons:  * It will close down an entire downtown city block for approximately one year for construction.* Construction in an urban setting requires greater coordination than in suburban settings.* The GoRaleigh Bus Station construction will overlap with park construction. The current GoRaleigh transit services are being provided on Martin Street adjacent to the Moore Square project which provides another layer of complexity for the future contractors.* The site is historic with it being one of the original open spaces designated in the founding of the city. The site is not owned by the city but is by the State of NC. The highest quality of construction is need for this urban park to stand the test of time and use.* Pullen Park renovations was asked as a comparison; that project had over $900,000 in change orders (16%) increase as well as significant schedule delays. Additionally, the site is not in an urban environment and the construction practices conducted near the trees are not related or comparable to those proposed at Moore Square.* The historic tree canopy was the number one priority determined by the public during the most recent engagement in the spring of 2015. In order to protect the trees from future damage from pedestrians and events, the design proposes constructing a seat wall and low perimeter fencing. Construction in these areas requires specialized skill, care and detail. The project will not have typical tree protection in which no activity or construction occurs in the sensitive tree root zones.Use of CMAR will allow the project to keep the current schedule of breaking ground in August. If CMAR is not used, construction is anticipated to have a minimum 3 month delay and begin in late October. Completing the project with the lowest bidder will be adding risk to complete the project on the proposed schedule. It was requested by Mayor and City Council to have the project completion before September 2017 in order for the site to be included in the IBMA festivities. Additional urgency has been expressed by community members, business owners and other stakeholders. The Moore Square planning and implementation process dates back to starting in 2009.  Three recent city projects in which the lowest bidder was used have resulted in schedules that were significantly impacted and delayed. Completing the project with the lowest bidder does not provide a way to ensure the construction team has the proper qualifications and understanding of constructing seat walls and fencing in the sensitive tree root zones.  Over the past seven years, construction projects in the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources Department (PRCR) has averaged approximately eleven percent (11%) in change order costs on lowest bid projects. Of course, staff recognizes that some of the 11% includes owner directed change orders as well. In multiple projects within the same time period PRCR has had to engage lowest bid contractor regarding liquidated damages as a result of nonresponsive warranty items, project delays and in some circumstances poor quality workmanship.  The department has completed one project using CMAR, Abbotts Creek Community Center. The project finished under the guaranteed maximum price budget, allowing for additional scope items to be completed because of the cost savings.Staff recognizes it is ideal to have a CMAR team currently working on the project. Once a CMAR team is brought on board, their fees will be negotiated and prorated based on the current level of design. Further delays in CMAR approval will slow the progress and diminishes some of the benefits.  Moore Square is sensitive, high profile and complex. CMAR is a great fit for such a project because it is a way to ensure the construction project team is qualified to complete the construction in a sensitive and complex urban environment, provides pre-construction exploratory work and planning, and ensures the historic perimeter oaks which signify the park are safe.   Chairperson Crowder asked Interim Public Works (IPW) Director Rich Kelly and Planner I Grayson Maughan to come forward.Councilor Thompson moved to bid this project publicly due to the fact that the project is over 80% designed.  He acknowledged that the City may need some additional funds for some arborist time and an independent scheduler.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Stephenson and carried by a vote of 4-0.  Councilor Gaylord was absent but not excused.Councilor Stephenson agreed with Councilor Thompson, thanking him and City staff for all of the hard work they have dedicated to this issue.Item #15-08 – Z-4-16 – Oberlin Road Conditional Use DistrictThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the May 3, 2016 City Council Meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:This is a request to rezone 0.36 acre from Residential-10 with Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District and Special Residential Parking Overlay District (R-10 w/ NCOD & SRPOD) to Office Mixed Use-3 Stories-Parking Limited-Conditional Use with Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District and Special Residential Parking Overlay District (OX-3-PL-CU w/ NCOD & SRPOD).  Conditions specify maximum residential density, limit changes to front façade of building and confine future additions to rear, limit parking locations, prohibit certain uses, specify lighting design and pole height, and offer transit easement and shelter.  The Planning Commission recommends approval of the amended request by unanimous vote.   The proposal seeks to rezone the site primarily to allow office uses.  The present base zoning, R- 10, permits residential development only, up to a maximum of 10 units per acre, subject to the standards of the Neighborhood Conversation Overlay District (NCOD), which adds further restrictions on built form.  The property is also within the Special Residential Parking Overlay District (SRPOD), which restricts parking in the front yard of single-unit, detached housing.The site is currently occupied by a 1?-story, 2,500 square-foot, single-family residence, built about 1950.  The home is one of the later residences built in the Oberlin Village community, a historically African-American neighborhood dating from the 19th century.  The subject site is between two designated Raleigh Historic Landmarks—on the north, the Wilson Temple United Methodist Church (built 1910-11) and its associated campus, and to the south, the two-story James S. Morgan House (c. 1900).  Five other Raleigh Historic Landmarks stand within 1,000 feet of the site, along with numerous other neighborhood houses exemplifying the historic character and building scale which led to designation of the Oberlin Village NCOD in the 1990s.Properties outside the NCOD exhibit varied built form and uses.  Across Oberlin Road, the 4-story Oberlin Court mixed-use complex features ground-floor retail and upper story apartments facing Oberlin Road.  Just south of it is a one-story office, and south of that the two-story InterAct social services building.  West of the site, and within the NCOD, is the 4?-acre Mayview Apartments complex, consisting of 61 units housed within 26 buildings.  The 25-acre Jaycee Park borders the apartment campus on the north.Topographically, the site is situated near a high point along Oberlin Road, with parcel contours descending gradually toward the north and west.  At present, a tall hedge edges a semi-circular, front yard driveway, obscuring much of the building from the street.  Several large trees stand toward the rear of the lot, but most of the yard area is open lawn.The current zoning of most of the properties west of Oberlin Road, adjoining the subject site, is R-10.  The Oberlin Court complex is within a Planned Development area, while the offices south of it are zoned Office Mixed Use-3 stories-Parking Limited (OX-3-PL).  Like the subject site, properties west of Oberlin Road also are subject to NCOD and SRPOD standards.The requested base zoning, OX-3, would permit office and residential uses on site.  Density is conditioned to a maximum of 14 units per acre--the same maximum as the site's Future Land Use designation, Moderate Density Residential.  NCOD standards will be retained under the zoning, as will SRPOD designation.  Case conditions go further, requiring retention of the existing building's front facade (and thus its setback), and restricting front-yard parking for non-residential uses [the requested Parking Limited (PL) frontage would otherwise permit up to two bays of parking between the building and street].  PL frontage is considered a "hybrid" form per the Urban Form map, and is consistent with the designation of Oberlin Road as a Transit Emphasis Corridor.  The conditioned transit easement further supports the corridor designation.  Other case conditions provide mitigation of potential redevelopment impacts.Planner II Doug Hill presented this item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Map:  Adopted ZoningImages:  Aerial View* View into site from Oberlin Road;* Property north of site – Wilson Temple United Methodist Church campus; * Property south of site – James S. Morgan House (c. 1900);* View south – frontage on Oberlin Road;* View to west along site’s north lot line;* View north toward site from Mayview Avenue;* View north – frontage on Oberlin Road (existing transit stop circled);* View across Oberlin Road from site, toward northeast; and* View across Oberlin Road from site, toward southeast.Maps:* Future Land Use Map* Urban Form MapCOUNCILOR GAYLORD ARRIVED AT 2:11 P.M.Proposed Conditions1. Maximum residential density limited;2. Changes to front façade and roof height/form limited – future additions restricted to rear of building;3. Parking locations limited;4. Certain uses prohibited;5. Design and height of pole-mounted lighting limited; and6. Transit easement and shelter offered.Existing versus Proposed ZoningExisting ZoningProposed ZoningResidential Density:10 DUs/acre(max. 3 DUs)14 DUs/acre(max. 5 DUs)Setbacks:Front:Side:Rear:Per NCOD:Within 10% of median on same side of block face5’20’Per NCOD:Within 10% of median on same side of block face50’*0’ or 6’**Retail Intensity Permitted:(not permitted)(not permitted)Office Intensity Permitted:(not permitted)10,200 sf*Per Neighborhood Transition Request **Per General Building typePlanner Hill mentioned that the property is very narrow, meaning the transitions would overlap.  If there were any future additions to the rear of the property, it would require approval from the BOA. Comprehensive Plan Analysis* Inconsistent with Future Land Use Map (Moderate Density Residential).* Consistent with Urban Form Map (Transit Emphasis Corridor).* Consistent policies:o LU 2.6 - Zoning and Infrastructure Impacts;o LU 4.9 - Corridor Development;o LU 7.6 - Pedestrian-Friendly Development;o T 4.15 - Enhanced Rider Amenities;o UD 1.10 - Frontage;o UD 2.2 - Multi-Modal Design;o UD 3.7 - Parking Lot Placement;o UD 6.1 - Encouraging Pedestrian-Oriented Uses;o UD 6.2 - Ensuring Pedestrian Comfort and Convenience;o UD 7.3 - Design Guidelines;o HP 2.4 - Protecting Historic Neighborhoods;o HP 2.7 - Mitigating Impacts on Historic Sites;o AP-WO 1 - Wade-Oberlin Vision;o AP-WO 2 - Wade-Oberlin Land Use Compatibility;o AP-WO 3 - Protecting Wade-Oberlin’s Neighborhood Character; ando AP-WO 6 - Wade-Oberlin Transition.* Inconsistent policyo LU 1.2 – Future Land Use Map and Zoning Consistency.Recommendations* Planning Commission:  Recommends approval by 10-0 vote.o While inconsistent with the Future Land Use Map, it is consistent with the Urban Form Map and most pertinent policies. Residential density cap is consistent with the Future Land Map (max. 14 units/ acre).o Reasonable and in the public interest: retention of the existing overlay districts provides continuity with adjacent properties, conditions provide added measures for maintaining site form and character, transit provisions support multi-modal access.o Compatible with surrounding area.  Conditioned limitations on building additions, site use, lighting, and parking locations offer improved transitions to neighboring properties.  * Wade CAC:  Supports proposal (Y- 26, N- 0, on 1/26/16). Councilor Stephenson asked about the limited parking condition. Planner Hill clarified that no residential parking would be allowed for the subject property.Applicant Marshall Rich, 712 Mills Street, stated he wants to keep the street scape and appearance of the structure as it looks today.  The only improvements would be to the existing building, which has heavy mold.  Councilor Stephenson mentioned that any construction would need approval from the BOA and stated that if construction should occur, the applicant would be asking the BOA for relief from a zoning category that the applicant asked for.Attorney John Anderson, 2021 Fairview Road, reiterated that the applicant desires for the house to look identical to a residential home.  Attorney Anderson acknowledged that the applicant is requesting additional restrictions.Councilor Stephenson expressed his appreciation for the applicant’s conversation with the neighbors.  He added that labeling this property as a landmark does provide a one-year delay for demolition but does not put any other restrictions on the house.  He confirmed that the applicant wants to maintain the façade and roof line which is a stronger protection on this property than to landmark properties on either side.  He asked Planner Hill for clarification.Planner Hill stated that because the properties on either side are historic landmarks, the adjoining properties would be subject to certificates of approval.  Design considerations on either side of the subject property are held to a higher standard.  Any of these properties have the potential to be demolished; however, it is a different process than a typical demolition.Councilor Thompson confirmed that the applicant had reached out to Wilson Temple United Methodist Church.  Mr. Rich added that the church prefers that the property remain residential; however, should the property become an office, they would like the character to remain intact.  He added that it is not economically feasible for the property to remain a residence.Chairperson Crowder asked Assistant Planning Director (APD) Travis Crane to provide information on additional restrictions, above what is required in the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), which the applicant has placed on the property.  APD Crane responded that this is a conditional use request.  The additional restrictions are relating to maintaining the residential character of the property. Chairperson Crowder asked anyone opposed to speak.Susan Adley-Warrick, 128 Ellington Oaks Court, thanked the Committee for providing an opportunity to speak.  She stated that she is the secretary of Friends of Oberlin Village.  She named several citizens and group members that could not be present at the meeting today and provided a copy of their April 25, 2016 meeting minutes.  She stated that Friends of Oberlin would like the property to retain its strong residential character.  The property could have as many as three living units, which would create less traffic and keep a more “neighborly” feel.  She also commented on the desire to improve the walkability of the neighborhood.Councilor Stephenson asked for clarification on Ms. Adley-Warrick’s preference for the building to retain its residential feel.  She responded that Friends of Oberlin like how it looks right now and would not mind if the property was turned into a 3-unit residence.Chairperson Crowder stated that each of the three units could potentially have four bedrooms each.  Ms. Adley-Warrick responded that the subject property is not a historic structure but fits well into the neighborhood.  She heard that there could be a new, larger structure that could come closer to the lot line.  She added that Friends of Oberlin likely did not contemplate each unit having four bedrooms.  Speaking for herself and not on behalf of her group, she stated that she didn’t believe that parking would be a challenge should the property remain residential.  Chairperson Crowder added that at the corner of Oberlin and Mayview, there are two houses on each side that have become rental properties.  Each location has a lot of cars.  She asked for clarification on what Friends of Oberlin would prefer.  Ms. Adley-Warrick expressed difficulty in responding on behalf of her group considering the bedroom amount was not contemplatedWake Citizens Advisory Council (CAC) Chair Donna Bailey, 2506 Mayview Road, stated that the applicant appeared before the CAC two times.  The Wake CAC feels this rezoning is a win-win for the neighborhood due to the outside structure being maintained and enhanced.  She added that this location is not the most desirable place to live due to high traffic.  Many surrounding properties are student rentals, which create a tremendous amount of traffic and trash.  An office would have very little traffic impact and the neighbors should feel very secure due to the fact that offices are usually very nice.Christopher Parnin, 1429 Chester Road, stated he is in favor of residential density.  With lots of parking and development across the street from the subject property, there will be no way to safely cross, so he requested the City look into adding a raised crosswalk for pedestrian safety.  Councilor Gaylord responded that although he suspects Oberlin Road is controlled by NCDOT, he will ask City staff to look into the lack of crosswalks.  Chairperson Crowder responded that the NCDOT does not allow raised crosswalks.  Planner Lamb stated that Oberlin Road is a City-maintained road and there is a midblock protective crosswalk just north of the subject property, which has a median as a pedestrian refuge.Councilor Stephenson asked City Attorney Ira Botvinick if the applicant could file for a demolition since they would not be allowed to change the front façade or roof line.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that the applicant could not voluntarily demolish the property.There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved approval for item #15-08 – Z-4-16 – Oberlin Road Conditional Use District.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Gaylord and carried unanimously 4-0.Item #15-05 – Stone’s Warehouse Project – Change of ContractorThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the May 3, 2016 City Council Meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet, which was explained at the meeting by Housing and Neighborhoods Director Larry Jarvis.On August 4, 2015, Council approved the Purchase, Sale and Development contract with Transfer Development, LLC, for the purchase of the Stone’s Warehouse property.  The contract listed the general contractor as Clancy & Theys.  On April 16, 2016, Housing & Neighborhoods received a letter from Transfer Development, LLC, requesting permission to replace the originally proposed general contractor with C.T. Wilson Construction Company. What is requested:  Transfer Development, LLC requests that Council authorize an amendment to the Purchase, Sale, and Development contract with the City of Raleigh to replace the originally proposed general contractor, Clancy & Theys, with C.T. Wilson Construction Company for the Stones Warehouse Project.Background:  On January 20, 2015, City Council approved the sale of the Stone’s Warehouse property located at 500/510 E Davie Street, 400 Chavis Way, and 419 South East Street to Transfer Development, LLC for the construction of a mixed use development consisting of townhomes and commercial space.On August 4, 2015, City Council approved the Purchase, Sale and Development Contract with Transfer Development, LLC for the purchase of the Stones Warehouse property.The Purchase, Sale and Development Contract is based upon the proposal submitted by Transfer Development, LLC in response to the request for proposals (RFP) issued by the City of Raleigh on August 5, 2014.  In that submittal, Transfer Development, LLC proposed to work with general contractor Clancy & Theys to complete the redevelopment at the Stone’s Warehouse site.  On April 6, 2016, the Housing & Neighborhoods Department received a letter from Transfer Development, LLC requesting permission to replace the originally proposed general contractor with C.T. Wilson Construction Company.  In their letter, Transfer Development, LLC cites several reasons for requesting to work with a contractor other than the one originally proposed.  These include:1. A long history of working with C.T. Wilson in the Triangle;2. C.T. Wilson’s experience working on similarly-sized projects using Federal and State Historic Tax Credits (successful completion of over 50 projects);3. A preference by the financing partner, Self-Help Credit Union, to work with C.T. Wilson, also based on a long and successful relationship with the contractor; and4. C.T. Wilson is a smaller commercial contractor, which is more in line with the size of the Stone’s Warehouse project and allows for cost effective construction pricing and lower overhead costs.In reviewing C.T. Wilson’s qualifications, staff found that C.T. Wilson has a strong history of completing similar historic rehabilitation projects throughout the Triangle.  The contractor maintains a plan to encourage the participation of Small Disadvantaged Minority and Women Owned Businesses (SDMWOB) and is committed to meeting the City’s goal of 15% utilization of SDMWOB firms on the Stone’s Warehouse project.Recommendation:  That City Council considers the request from Transfer Development, LLC to amend the Purchase, Sale and Development Contract between Transfer Development, LLC and the City of Raleigh to replace general contractor Clancy & Theys with C.T. Wilson.  No additional changes to the Purchase, Sale, and Development Contract are recommended.Jason Queen, 207 Fayetteville Street, Suite 200, gave a brief overview of the current state of the project.  He stated there was tremendous support, with commitment secured for 80% of the space.  Commitment letters have also been received for the commercial space.  The site-plan approval is a two-part process and the developers have completed one review cycle of each process.  Permit drawings will be completed within approximately 6 weeks, which will allow for construction to begin in August of 2016.Councilor Thompson thanked Mr. Queen for the information but stated it was not the information needed today.  He expressed concern that Transfer Development, LLC is requesting to make a substantial change.  He stated that the developers have placed the City in a precarious position since other developers were interested in the Stone’s Warehouse Project.  Mr. Queen responded that all contractors were suggested team members during the Request for Proposals (RFP) process and noted that only a small amount of weight was placed on the specific contractor choice.  Transfer Development, LLC was ranked 27 points higher than other applicants.Councilor Thompson asked Mr. Queen what had changed, adding he knows all of the contractors are fully capable.  He expressed concern with how the situation was handled and asked what Mr. Queen had learned.  Mr. Queen responded that he takes full responsibility and has learned to keep all lines of communication open.Steven Schuster, 313 West Martin Street, stated that his partner and he are embedded into the development team.  This project is complex with many moving points.  He admitted failure to keeping everyone informed and has learned that there is never too much communication.  He took responsibility and made a commitment to Council to work as a team, which he believes is the only team that has consistently responded with the Small Area Plan.  He stated that this project is challenging since it is a modest scale development on a 2-million dollar property.  He added that the commitment to deliver this project on time has not waivered and the team is on schedule to do so.Councilor Thompson stated that businesses should follow the golden rule of treating others as they would like to be treated, which did not happen during this process.  He asked City Attorney Botvinick if the City needed to advertise another RFP.Chairperson Crowder stated that the RFP and the Clerk’s notes list Mr. Schuster as the architect of record.  She asked Mr. Schuster if he was the partner of this project.  Mr. Schuster responded that he is personally a partner in the development team and that Mr. Queen was the team leader.  He emphasized that he continues to make a commitment to Council and is not pleased that the ball has been dropped.  Councilor Thompson expressed his appreciation and acknowledged his work on Raleigh Union Station.  Mr. Schuster added that he is also completing an addition to a National Historic Landmark church.Chairperson Crowder expressed her understanding that the site plan, the financing, and leasing need to all come together.  She asked Mr. Queen for an update on signed letters of intent.  Mr. Queen said he could provide those to the Clerk by the end of the business day as they were a requirement of the loan.Scott Cutler, 1428 Van Page Boulevard, stated this is an important project for the City.  Clancy and Theys supports the project and does not want to see it disrupted.  As long as the City has the level of transparency and documentation needed, he recommends moving forward.Chairperson Crowder expressed her appreciation to Clancy and Theys for taking the high road on this issue.  She thanked them for all of the work they have done for the City.  Mr. Cutler added that Raleigh Union Station is a complex project with a competent team.  He met yesterday with Mr. Schuster and their joint venture partner.  There has been great communication during this project and it is on track.  Assistant City Manager Jim Green added that he and Mr. Cutler had a conversation regarding the importance of Raleigh Union Station and they are making sure to work as a team.Chairperson Crowder then directed legal questions to City Attorney Botvinick.  She stated that while reviewing the contract, it appears that Transfer Development, LLC is asking the City to alter and amend the contract due to justified circumstances of general contractor change, which need to be justified to Council.  The Council will then decide if the justification will warrant a change.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that the team proposal is part of the contract and any amendment will require consent of all parties.  A formality would be to prepare an amendment to be signed by all parties.  Council does not have the authority to rescind the contract.  He added that the Council has material in their packets as to why the change is being made.  The next step would be to prepare an amendment for the Council agenda and the Council can vote on the amendment.Chairperson Crowder asked if the City would need to send out another RFP.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that the contract states the Council can amend rather than create a new contract.Councilor Thompson stated that since Clancy and Theys has agreed to step aside and this is an important project, he moved to approve item #15-05 – Stone’s Warehouse Project – Change of Contractor.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Gaylord and carried unanimously 4-0.Chairperson Crowder concluded by asking Mr. Schuster and Mr. Queen to communicate with all partners.  Mr. Schuster thanked Chairperson Crowder and stated that he has always delivered and will continue to do so.  Chairperson Crowder lastly reminded Mr. Queen to provide letters of intent to the Clerk before close of business today.Adjournment.  There being no further business, Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting adjourned at 3:00 p.m.Cassidy R. PritchardAssistant Deputy Clerk	Growth and Natural Resources Committee		May 11, 2016Page 2 of 12