GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEEThe Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on Wednesday, June 15, 2016, at 3:00 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:Committee							StaffChairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding	      Deputy City Attorney Ira BotvinickCouncilor Bonner Gaylord		      Assistant City Manager James GreeneCouncilor Russ Stephenson		      Assistant Planning Director Travis CraneCouncilor Dickie Thompson		      Senior Planner Todd Delk		      Planner II Charles Dillard		      Planner II Doug Hill		      Senior Project Engineer Chris Stanley	  				These are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order at 3:06 p.m. Item #15-02 – Drainage Assistance Policy RevisionsThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the March 21, 2016 City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:Following the staff presentation at the May 25, 2016 Growth and Natural Resources Committee meeting, Committee members asked for additional information related to two key questions:  how does staff plan to manage low-priority projects that linger on the pending project list, and what communication strategy is in place to ensure that customers remain informed as to the status of their project?  Staff will provide answers to these questions and be available to provide any additional information requested by the Committee.Original Description from 5/25/16 GNR Agenda:  This item relates to adjustments to the City’s Drainage Assistance Policy (DAP).  The proposed adjustments include removal of the cost-share requirement, the creation of additional flexibility in review cycles for new projects, and the addition of a requirement that public drainage easements be dedicated by property owners participating in the program.  The Stormwater Management Advisory Commission considered this matter at their meetings of October 1, 2015, November 5, 2015, and April 7, 2016.  The high level proposal was shared with the City Council at their November 17, 2015 Work Session.Budget impact (funding source/budget action):  The fiscal impacts of these changes include removal of the cost-share revenue source, which generally totals approximately $75,000 per year.  In addition a longer-term consequence of incrementally adopting the drainage system as public is a gradual increase in ongoing maintenance cost.  Staff expects that this rise in maintenance costs will be at least partially offset by savings realized from the maintenance itself – that is, infrastructure will be maintained rather than run to failure to be replaced at a much higher cost.  Offsets include an anticipated adjustment to the Stormwater Fee, which will increase funding to this program.  This revenue increase will expand overall capital expenditures (more and better projects) and fund the addition of two new construction crews (more in-house projects and an expanded maintenance capability).Recommendation:  Staff and the Stormwater Management Advisory Commission (SMAC) recommend adoption of the revised policy.Alternatives: Potential alternatives are as follows:Status Quo – This alternative will prevent a significant increase to the City’s level of service with respect to the Drainage Assistance Program.  Preserving the cost-share aspect of the program will continue to limit project scopes to current levels, thus continuing the trend of “band-aid” repairs.Adoption of revised policy without public easement requirement – This alternative would allow for a lesser expansion of service level as compared to that which is recommended, since it would prevent the City from ensuring the continued maintenance of infrastructure that is rehabilitated or reconstructed with public funding.Senior Project Engineer (SPE) Chris Stanley presented the information with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Outline* Highlights of proposed DAP; and* Discussion of Growth & Natural Resources concerns from previous meeting.Revised policy – highlights:  effective July 1, 2016* Cost share from property owners will no longer be required;o Focus on fixing priority drainage needs based on available funding and resources.* SMAC and City Council will maintain discretionary authority to approve drainage assistance projects; however, projects may be brought to SMAC for consideration at varying frequencies throughout the year as needed, rather than the current biannual project review cycle; and* Dedicated permanent public drainage easements are recommended over all drainage system improvements.He then spoke on two topics that the Committee had asked for further information on at the last meeting.  These two topics included:* Time spent on Stormwater’s qualified/pending projects’ list – How can staff give merit to potential legacy projects/issues and address drainage problems which qualify but may not be of sufficient priority to move to the approved list quickly?* Communication strategy with property owners – What is/will be Stormwater staff’s communication strategy for citizens with qualifying drainage projects, particularly issues that may be of lower priority when compared to others?Project-problem management* Current drainage assistance project Lists.o 42 SMAC/Council approved drainage assistance projects;o 41 “qualified/pending” projects awaiting priority approval and funding – likely to reach into the hundreds over the next 12 to 18 months; ando Almost 300 drainage complaints in the last 12 months alone.* Approximately 10% of these eventually turn into an approved Drainage Assistance project.* Qualified/pending projects’ list will continue to grow significantly over time.o Con: lower priority projects will gravitate toward the bottom of the list with the potential to sit for (potentially) long periods of time; ando Pro: will allow City to better understand and identify true level of stormwater needs community-wide and will help to facilitate an organized, prioritized, objective approach to fixing the “worst problems first” city-wide.Effective and efficient customer-project management* Monitor & update pending projects as conditions change;o Project list is dynamic – priorities and project ratings can change if/as conditions worsen.o Through policy changes and recent discussion with SMAC, will be able to bring projects forward every other month beginning in August 2016, should conditions change, to make projects a higher priority.* Technical support; ando In cases that may not qualify or likely to be very low on the priority ranking list, staff can provide referrals to other resources for repairs and possible funding assistance.o Advise on simple solutions that homeowners can potentially undertake themselves.* Similar issues in peer communities and large NC stormwater programs across NC.o Charlotte, Greensboro, and Wilmington.o All of these communities highlighted internal efforts of project/problem reduction through in-house design and maintenance/construction crews.o All work in a similar manner based on prioritization and severity, “fixing the worst problems first”.In-house design and construction* Current Stormwater Project Management Staff (DAP); ando Three licensed Professional Engineers.o 70+ years of design and construction experience across entire team.* Construction Resources.o Two “on-call” construction contracts through DAP.o Addition of two Stormwater maintenance construction crews in FY17.* Assist with in-house construction of anywhere from 15 to 25 projects per year.Proactive and effective project communication* Sharing of project portfolio with homeowners;o Staff maintains an active, dynamic portfolio of qualified projects, pending approval.o Project list is shared with all interested homeowners and drainage assistance petitioners.o This list can provide full context of most severe issues across the entire city (including photos, project scores, and other comparable metrics).* Open Data Initiative; ando Stormwater Division is a pilot for the “What Works Cities” Program.o Will help support the Division’s communications efforts with ongoing and transparent publication of key performance data.o Will include posting and regular updates of the drainage assistance projects’ list.* Stormwater Communications Specialist position.o Tasked with development of a Program-wide communications strategy.o Will include marketing the DA Program and ensuring proactive communications with our customers.SPE Stanley stated that consistent prioritization is important due to limited funding, adding that the City of Raleigh spoke with the City of Charlotte regarding their process.  Charlotte has a significant backlog of projects, similar to other municipalities.  Councilor Gaylord asked about Charlotte’s communication strategy.  SPE Stanley responded that they provide realistic project completion timelines to homeowners in addition to posting “help yourself” tips on their website.  This allows for homeowners to potentially resolve minor issues should they arise.Councilor Thompson asked how many issues are resolved out of all the citizen requests received by the City.  SPE Stanley responded that out of approximately 300 complaints received in the last year, only about ten percent were placed on the waiting list.  Although this is a small number, the amount of projects add up quickly.SPE Stanley expanded on the in-house design and construction process.  He stated that the City will be able to save money with design and construction fees with this approach.  Currently, the City has two on-call construction contracts, which allows for contractors to quickly move from job to job.  Moving forward, the City will have Stormwater crews dedicated to projects.Councilor Gaylord mentioned that although he had previously challenged the prioritization program, it is clear that prioritizing is the best option.  SPE Stanley responded using Charlotte as an example, stating that higher priority issues were left lingering and the low priority projects backlogged to over 5,000.  Councilor Gaylord added that given the City’s limited resources, it makes sense that Raleigh complete higher priority projects while being communicative with citizens.Councilor Stephenson asked if Charlotte is being more selective about which projects they are willing to add to their list.  SPE Stanley responded that Charlotte is tightening up the standards for getting on the list; however, Raleigh is not currently recommending that approach.  The biggest priority is communicating more realistic timelines with citizens.There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved for adoption of the resolution approving the Stormwater DAP and adoption of an ordinance amending the City Code to conform to the new policy.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Gaylord and carried unanimously.Item #15-10 Z-6-16 – Leesville Road This item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the June 7, 2016 City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:This is a request to rezone 7.72 acres from Residential-4 and Residential-6 (R-4 & R-6) to Neighborhood Mixed Use-3 Stories-Conditional Use (NX-3-CU).  Conditions prohibit certain uses and drive-in/ drive-through facilities; limit maximum floor area for non-residential uses and any single non-residential building; cap number of dwelling units; require allocation covenant for nonresidential square footage and number of dwelling units; restrict maximum building height; limit hours of retail sales, truck delivery, and solid-waste service; restrict proximity of solid waste collection facilities to east lot lines; specify design and maximum height of pole-mounted lighting; provide tree conservation buffer along east lot line south of Old Leesville Road; specify primary building materials; provide for relocation of historic Leesville Teacherage; along Old Leesville Road, conditions prohibit street-facing commercial buildings, any driveway cut, and delivery truck access; prohibit buildings south of existing road right-of-way; and provide screen wall along west side of road.  Following the closing of the Public Hearing on June 7, 2016, the conditions of the case can be modified until August 6, 2016.  The Planning Commission recommended approval of the amended request by unanimous vote, but in making its recommendation requested revisions to conditions, which applicant has submitted.  The Northwest Citizens Advisory Council voted support for the proposal by split vote (17 in favor, 14 opposed).Planner II Doug Hill presented the item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Zoning Case Z-6-16 Leesville/Old Leesville Roads:  Request to rezone 7.72 acres from R-4 & R-6 to NX-3-CUMaps:  Adopted Zoning and Area ZoningAerial View:  Current developmentsImages:* View north from Leesville Road/Lakewood Valley Way intersection;* View south – frontage on Leesville Road;* Site frontage on Leesville Road;* View south from Ashford Park Drive/Old Leesville Road intersection;* View south on Old Leesville Road toward Ashford Park Drive;* View west into site from Ashford Park Drive; and* View north of site frontage on Old Leesville Road.Map:  Area TopographyInventoried historic resource:  Leesville School TeacherageThe large, early twentieth-century building originally housed teachers working at Leesville Academy, which stood across the road, but has served as a private residence for many years.  Though extensively remodeled in the 1970s, the house retains its wide triple-A roof and decorative gable vents.  Inside there is a center passage, four rooms on each floor, and fireplaces in each room.Maps:  Future Land Use and Urban FormExisting vs. proposed zoningExisting ZoningProposed ZoningMax. ResidentialDensity:4.66 DUs/ acre(36 DUs total)4.66 DUs/acre(36 DUs total)Max. Retail Intensity Permitted:-0-63,000Max. Office Intensity Permitted:-0-63,000Proposed conditions1. Certain uses prohibited.2. Maximum floor area for non-residential uses limited to 63,000 square feet (sf); maximum of 36 dwelling units prescribed; allocation covenant prescribed.3. Maximum floor area for a single non-residential building limited to 50,000 sf.4. Maximum building height limited to two stories/ 40 feet.5. Hours of retail sales and truck deliveries limited.6. Pole-mounted lighting fixtures to be of full-cutoff design; maximum height 20 feet.7. No commercial use or public entrance to face Old Leesville Road.8. No driveway cut allowed from Old Leesville Road.9. No solid waste facilities within 50 feet of east lot lines.10. No delivery truck access permitted to or from Old Leesville Road.11. Wall, with lighting, required along Old Leesville Road frontage, then south past site building/ service area.12. Drive-in or drive-through prohibited.13. Solid waste service hours limited.14. No building permitted to extend south of Old Leesville Road public right-of-way.15. Tree conservation area specified on southernmost part of site.16. Primary building materials specified.17. Residence at 9513 Old Leesville Road to be relocated.18.  – Comprehensive Plan AnalysisInconsistent with Future Land Use Map (Office & Residential Mixed Use).The site not addressed by Urban Form Map.Consistent policies:LU 1.3 – Conditional Use Consistency;LU 5.1 – Reinforcing the Urban Pattern;LU 5.2 – Managing Commercial Development Impacts;LU 5.4 – Density Transitions;LU 5.6 – Buffering Requirements;LU 6.2 – Complementary Uses and Urban Vitality; andLU 7.5 – High-Impact Commercial Uses.Inconsistent policies:LU 1.2 – Future Land Use Map and Zoning Consistency; andLU 10.6 – Retail Nodes.Outstanding issues1. Matters identified in staff comments.2. Existing block perimeter exceeds Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) standards.3. Sewer and fire flow matters may need to be addressed upon redevelopment.Recommendations* Planning Commission:  Recommends approval by unanimous vote, but with conditions to be amended.o While the proposal is inconsistent with the Future Land Use map of the Comprehensive Plan, it is consistent with most pertinent policies of the Comprehensive Plan (e.g., density transitions, buffering; complementary uses).o The proposed rezoning is reasonable and in the public interest.  Rezoning would permit added provision of goods and services near existing residential development.  Case conditions serve to mitigate potential development impacts.o The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area.  Conditions aim to reduce development intensity (e.g., limiting density, square footage & building height) and impacts (e.g., prohibited uses, restricted lighting, and enhanced buffers). NOTE: In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission requested revisions to conditions.  With the closing of the Public Hearing on June 7, 2016 those revisions could come forward, and have been included in the Committee’s agenda materials. * Northwest CAC:  Supports proposal by split vote (Y- 17, N- 14, on 4/12/16).Amendments to conditions* 10:  Delivery truck defined.* 11: Maximum wall height specified; gate access qualified; wall screen plantings specified.* 14:  Exhibit provided (illustrating max. distance south for site buildings).* 16:  Deleted (duplicated UDO).* 17 (former 18):  House relocation timing specified.UDO Section 8.3.1.3The access regulations are intended to provide safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access within developments and between adjacent developments and to lessen traffic congestion. Pedestrian, bike and vehicular access should be safe, direct and convenient. Additional amendments proposed* 5:  Hours restricted for idling of delivery truck engines.* 18:  On Leesville Road – built-to range, minimum setback, maximum parking depth, maximum building coverage within build-to, & primary entrance oriented to street specified. Tree conservation proposed to be left to developer. Planner Hill noted that in the past week, the City received amendments to the original amendments.  Since they were received on Friday and not able to be circulated until Monday morning, not all case reviewers have been able to review the amendments.Attorney Michael Birch of Morningstar Law Group, 630 Davis Drive, Suite 200, Morrisville, NC 27560, spoke on behalf of the applicant and handed out the revised conditions.  He mentioned that the Planning Commission recommended approval of the original amended conditions.  At the public hearing, Councilor Cox requested a condition prohibiting the idling of trucks overnight, which was one of the conditions submitted on Friday, June 10, 2016.  An additional condition (condition number 18) allows for development to move towards Leesville Road and touches on setbacks/build-to lines and tree conservation.  Since Leesville Road is a thoroughfare, without this condition it would require primary tree conservation along Leesville Road frontage.  Primary tree conservation can be provided between 0-100 feet off the road so long as it averages 50 feet.  The condition allows for the majority of the tree conservation to be placed south of the 500-foot line, bypassing the tree conservation rule along the upper west side of the property.  He mentioned that the developer will still have to meet the UDO requirement of ten percent tree conservation.  He further explained condition number 18, including the requirement of an entrance facing Leesville Road and limited parking.  The purpose of this condition is for the development to be focused above the 500-foot line and take further advantage of tree conservation in the south area.Attorney Birch mentioned that staff believes the enforcement of the truck idling condition may be difficult; however, he still believes it is important to include in the conditions.  He added that comments such as this are often received on this type of condition and have been included in numerous zoning cases.He expanded on condition number 10 regarding delivery truck access, noting there was a request to review the language by staff.  The applicant is willing to make this condition clearer by adding “subject to approval by the governing body” to the wording.  He next spoke on condition number 18.  He stated that the applicant will add language to clarify that tree conservation will be secondary, although the developer will still need to follow UDO requirements.  He added that the building entrance off of Leesville Road will be open to the public. Attorney Birch stated that all comments received by staff have been addressed.  He spoke on condition number eight, regarding text change TC-8-15, stating that Draymore Manor had previously not wanted an additional access point onto Old Leesville Road.  There is now an access point that has been constructed as part of the retail/Walgreens development.  As a part of that development, it has recorded an offer of cross access in favor of the applicant’s property, which will need to be accepted by the applicant upon development.  This cross access provides access to both Strickland Road and Old Leesville Road.  The developer will not place a new access point onto Old Leesville Road, but rather take advantage of the cross access from the northern property.  This condition is authorized by TC-8-15 and requests that Council determine this standard provides for safe, efficient, and convenient vehicular access to and from the site and does not adversely affect traffic congestion.  He asked his traffic engineer to speak on these issues.Ronald Stephenson, of Ramey Kemp and Associates, 5808 Farrington Place, stated that he prepared a TIA (Traffic Impact Analysis) report.  This TIA considered the cross access and supports everything that Attorney Birch discussed.  The TIA has been received and approved, although the applicant will have to go through more permit processes with the North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT).  He noted that the nearby middle school is making road improvements, including additional turning lanes, near the intersection of Strickland Road and Leesville Road.  Out of the two access points on Leesville road, one will most likely be delivery access, although it has not been confirmed since this is a rezoning case.  At the request of Councilor Thompson, Mr. Stephenson showed the approximate location of the access points and cross access on the aerial view.Chairperson Crowder stated that since these revised amendments were just circulated on Monday morning, there are still issues that need to be resolved.  She asked Attorney Birch to work with staff on conditions 18, 13, and five.  She was not comfortable with one sentence in condition number 18, which reads “trees within the build-to area may, at the election of the developer, be designated as primary tree conservation area if such areas otherwise meet the standards for primary tree conservation area along a thoroughfare.”  Attorney Birch responded that City Code states that any trees within the build-to area cannot count toward tree conservation.  The applicant is attempting to use these trees within the build-to area towards the count.  Chairperson Crowder suggested for the applicant to return to the June 29, 2016 Committee meeting.  This would allow time to send the item to the full Council for the July 5, 2016 meeting.  Attorney Birch asked if he could call his client while the next agenda item is being discussed to ask about condition number 18.Chairperson Crowder asked if any conditions could be withdrawn since they had already been submitted, despite not being signed.  City Attorney Ira Botvinick confirmed that conditions are not valid without a signature.  Chairperson Crowder asked if the Committee could even consider these amended conditions without a signature.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that signed conditions need to be submitted two days prior to a Council meeting.  Attorney Birch added that conditions under revision are not typically signed because he wants feedback from the Committee.Chairperson Crowder asked Assistant Planning Director (APD) Travis Crane if additional time would help establish issues in condition numbers five and 18.  APD Crane responded that it is entirely up to the Committee.  If the Committee believes more work needs to be done, staff is willing to work with the applicant.Councilor Stephenson asked what the worst case scenario would be for tree conservation should condition 18 be taken away.  APD Crane stated that if there is no condition specifying a build-to, there would be a tree-save area along Leesville Road averaging 50-feet in width.  Chairperson Crowder stated that she would like this item to be brought back to the June 29, 2016 Committee meeting after working with staff.  Attorney Birch clarified that he was not asking the Committee to move forward with condition number 18 today and wanted to receive Committee feedback prior to having further conversation with staff.  He asked if the Committee would be comfortable with moving forward with the exception of condition number 18, and if so, could he call his client and ask if he is willing to take a delay.Chairperson Crowder stated she did not have a problem with Attorney Birch speaking with his client and returning at the end of the meeting.  She expressed concern that enforcing idling trucks would be an issue.  Councilor Gaylord asked which department is responsible for enforcing the UDO.  APD Crane responded that he was responsible and it is particularly difficult after business hours, adding that it is next to impossible to enforce this type of regulation.  Councilor Gaylord said he would like to help homeowners understand these conditions should issues arise in the future.  Chairperson Crowder reiterated her request for Attorney Birch to work with staff on these issues.  The Committee was comfortable allowing Attorney Birch to speak with his client and return at the end of the meeting.Councilor Stephenson expressed his continued confusion and concern regarding tree conservation in relation to condition number 18.  APD Crane provided clarification.  Thomas Erwin, 401 Oberlin Road, #500, asked to speak on the proposed amendment to condition number 10 regarding delivery truck access.  Since there would not be any access from the subject property, all access would be from Mr. Erwin’s property.  He noted that he was the person who executed the offer of cross access and he knows that it will be difficult to get large trucks into the subject site across his property.  Councilor Stephenson asked for clarification on Mr. Erwin’s wishes.  He confirmed that Mr. Erwin does not want delivery trucks on Old Leesville Road, which the City may not have complete authority over.  Mr. Erwin added that the intersection (of Mr. Erwin’s property onto Old Leesville Road) is scheduled to be a full-movement intersection.  When this was proposed it made perfect sense; however, with these new amendments, it will be hard to regulate.Senior Planner Todd Delk stated that Old Leesville Road is maintained by NCDOT.  The City cannot prohibit delivery trucks with a zoning condition.  The applicant would need to ask NCDOT for permission.  Councilor Gaylord asked if the zoning condition could prohibit use of the cross access to the north for deliveries.  Senior Planner Delk responded that the property owners could control anything on their site; however, the City does not have control over Old Leesville Road.  City Attorney clarified that this is a cross access easement.  The property owners to the north can prohibit access, which would not need to be regulated by the City.Attorney Birch clarified that the applicant is fine with prohibiting delivery truck access from Old Leesville Road.  The current cross access allows for access to Strickland Road, which is fine with Mr. Erwin.  In order to add certainty for Mr. Erwin, Attorney Birch can alter the wording of the condition.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that although it does not seem like the best way to handle the issue, the City can enforce a private agreement should the Council wish to do so. Chairperson Crowder stated that the Committee would move on to the last item and wait for Attorney Birch to return after speaking with his client and Mr. Erwin.Later in the meeting, Attorney Birch returned and thanked the Committee for their patience.  He stated that his client is fine with deferring this to the next meeting.  There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved to defer item Z-6-16 – Leesville Road to the June 29, 2016 Committee meeting.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Gaylord and carried unanimously.  The hope is to bring this item to the full Council at the July 5, 2016 meeting.Item #15-09 CP-1-16 – Omnibus Text AmendmentThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the June 7, 2016 City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:The Comprehensive Plan Annual Progress Report summarizing implementation activity in 2015 was presented for information to the City Council on May 3, 2016.  CP-1-16 is an omnibus of recommended amendments to the Comprehensive Plan proposed in the Progress Report.  To generate the Progress Report, Planning staff coordinated with other City departments to review the progress of all actions in the plan.  Staff asked a few basic questions regarding progress and implementation of each action item.  In response, a number of text changes to the Comprehensive Plan are recommended.  These recommendations take the form of:  1) removal of implemented or obsolete action items, 2) replacement of an action with a policy, 3) reclassification of time frame, 4) Change in responsible agency.Planner II Charles Dillard presented the item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.CP-1-16 Omnibus Text amendments:  2015 Progress Report* Action IM 3.2 – Annual Progress Report.* An annual progress report shall be created to include:o Key accomplishments;o Critical issues; ando Implementing agencies.Purpose of the report* Track policy consistency of City Council actions, such as rezonings and text changes;* Identify emerging issues that should be considered in future planning;* Track implementation of the 363 action items; and* Propose alterations, based on the above.2015 progress report* April 26, 2016 recommended for approval by Planning Commission.* May 3, 2016 received for information by City Council.Staff recommended alterations (resulting from progress report)1. Remove implemented or obsolete actions;2. Additional or amended policy language;3. Replacement of an action with a policy;4. Reclassification of timeframe; and5. Change in type or responsible agency.Action items – What do they include?* Action item language – The task to be completed.* Responsible agencies – Who is responsible?o Primary;o Secondary; ando Tertiary.* Timeframe – When will the task be completed?o Short-Term;o Mid-Term;o Long-term; ando Ongoing.Changes made during Planning Commission review* Two items removed from amendment (items will remain in plan):o Action T 5.10 Pedestrian Crossing Standards: Establish standards for maximum distances between pedestrian crossings that are also associated with roadway classification to enhance walking and transit use.o Action EP 2.2 Park Acquisition: Annually acquire a minimum of 250 acres of land for parks, greenway corridors, or open space through purchase, partnerships, or dedication to provide citizens park experiences closer to where they live and work to meet the Raleigh Parks Plan’s goal of conserving 5,000 acres of land by 2030.  See also Element F: ‘Parks, Recreation, and Open Space’.Implemented action items* 32 completed items;* Seven transportation items; and* 15 area plan items.Items considered obsolete and removed* Eight Removed items; and* Three downtown items removed due to not being included in Downtown Plan.Items amended with new language* 16 amended items.* Example:  Action PR 6.2 Adopt-A-Park/Adopt-A-Trail (Ongoing).o Expand the Adopt-A-Park and Adopt-A-Trail programs to encourage individual citizens, neighborhoods, organized groups, partner agencies, non-profits, and Park Watch programs to participate in the establishment and maintenance of facilities and delivery of programs.Expand the Adopt-A-Park and Adopt-A-Trail programs to encourage individual citizens, neighborhoods, organized groups, partner agencies, and non-profits to participate in the establishment and maintenance of facilities and delivery of programs.Items reclassified as policies* 11 reclassified Items.o Two items revised and reclassified.* Action RC 4.4 Rezoning Impacts on Schoolso Implement recently adopted guidelines for evaluating the impact of re-zonings and proposed site plans on the school system.Coordinate development approvals with Wake County Public Schools. Inform them of rezonings that may have school impacts, and ensure new residential developments are reflected in demand projections.* Action RC 4.7 School Site Location Working Groupo Maintain inter-jurisdictional site location working group to identify available property for future school locations.Work with WCPSS to identify available properties for future school locations. Four Timeframes* Short-term (1-2 years);* Mid-term (3-5 years);* Long-Term (6-10 years); and* Ongoing.*All non-ongoing action items are reclassified as long-term.Items with changes in responsible agency designations  * 18 action items.* Examples:o Staff recommends changing the timeframe from mid-term to long-term and changing the primary responsible agency from Department of City Planning (DCP) to Economic Development (ED) for the following action item: * Action RC 3.3 Green Technology Strategy:  Develop a regional strategy for attracting and supporting businesses and start-ups in the green technology industry with participation from regional economic development entities and research universities.o Staff recommends changing the primary responsible agency from Public Utilities (PU) to Office of Sustainability (OS) and adding Public Utilities (PU) as the secondary responsible agency  for this action item:* Action EP 1.10 Community Supported Energy:  Explore opportunities to develop Community Supported Energy (CSE) options which allow homeowners, landowners, farmers, co-operatives, schools, and others to install renewable energy projects up to 10 megawatts in size and to sell power to the grid for a fixed price.The next Omnibus text amendment will come forward as part of the Annual Progress Report process in October of 2016.Chairperson Crowder confirmed with Planner Dillard that the City has already completed Action DT 1.3 Downtown Plan and that it should be struck through.Councilor Stephenson asked what the logic was behind removing Action EP 1.8 Solar and Co-Generation Incentives.  He asked if the City either completed this or deemed it unimportant.  Planner Dillard responded that the City has collaborated with NC Clean Energy Technology to explore a solarized Raleigh bulk purchase program to encourage homeowners to go solar.  The program was ultimately administered through Clean Energy for Raleigh.  Councilor Gaylord requested follow up on this item.  Assistant City Manager James Greene responded that staff would bring additional information to the July 5, 2016 Council meeting.Councilor Stephenson asked about Action CS 2.7 Regulations for Recyclable Storage.  Planner Dillard stated that no enforcement mechanism has been identified.  Councilor Stephenson asked if the lack of discussion means the City rejected this as an action item.  Councilor Gaylord requested follow up on this item.  Assistant City Manager Greene responded that staff would also bring information on this item to the July 5, 2016 Council meeting.Councilor Stephenson asked about Action DT 5.1 Fees for Open Space.  City Attorney Botvinick responded that the City hired a consultant to research this in detail, which determined it was not legally feasible.  There being no other questions, Councilor Gaylord moved to uphold staff’s recommendation for a public hearing on July 5, 2016 to consider this item with the exclusion of CS 2.7 Regulations for Recyclable Storage and EP 1.8 Solar and Co-Generation Incentives.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Thompson and carried unanimously.  The Committee again asked staff to provide Council with additional information on items CS 2.7 and EP 1.8 at the July 5, 2016 Council meeting.  Council can determine whether to move forward with these two items at that time.Adjournment.  There being no further business, Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting adjourned at 4:36 p.m.Cassidy R. PritchardAssistant Deputy Clerk 	Growth and Natural Resources Committee		June 15, 2016Page 2 of 15