GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEEThe Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on Wednesday, April 27, 2016, at 2:45 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:Committee							StaffChairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding		Deputy City Attorney Ira BotvinickCouncilor Bonner Gaylord				Assistant City Manager Jim GreeneCouncilor Russ Stephenson				Stormwater Review Manager Ben BrownCouncilor Dickie Thompson				Senior Planner Charles Dillard 							Planner II Doug Hill											Stormwater Program Manager Blair Hinkle      Interim Public Works Director Rich Kelly      Senior Planner Eric Lamb							Planner I Grayson Maughan				These are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order at 2:48 p.m.  The Committee agreed to rearrange the order of the agenda items.  The items were discussed in the following order:1) Item #15-04 – Moore Square Park Construction Manager at Risk Selection;2) Item #15-03 Z-34-13 – Hillsborough Street Conditional Use District; and3) Item #15-06 Z-3-16 – Forestville Road Conditional Use District.Item #15-04 – Moore Square Park Construction Manager at Risk SelectionThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the April 19, 2016 City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:In conjunction with the Public Works Department, the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources (PRCR) Department staff and design consultants from Sasaki Associates solicited a Request for Qualifications (RFQ) for a Construction Management At-Risk team for the redevelopment of Moore Square Park.The staff review team consisted of:* Grayson Maughan, Moore Square Project Manager;* Stephen Bentley, PRCR Superintendent;* Carlos Reyes, PRCR Construction Supervisor; and* Rich Kelly, Interim Public Works Director.It is important to note that Sasaki Associates, the City of Raleigh Moore Square design lead, participated in the scoring of the RFQs and not the interview process.The following chart illustrates the scores ranking the top three recommended firms. The ranking was used to narrow down the pool of applicants to conduct interviews and does not provide the final ranking. The final ranking is determined in combination with submittal ranking and interview performance.Reviewers12345RankingTotalWhiting-Turner and Holt301326348235293.51503.51Barnhill272328310235291.51436.52Brasfield Gorrie25832726922928913723The weighted scoring criteria used is the following:CriteriaWeightWeight Team organization and structure9Project personnel qualifications8Completion of Construction Manager “at Risk” projects in which there was little differences between the GMP and final cost10Record of successfully completed projects of similar scope without legal or technical problems6Previous experience with the City of Raleigh8Experience and expertise with urban park work6Experience and expertise with protection and construction in sensitive tree root zones7Experience in uncovering historically significant artifacts5Proximity to and familiarity with project area6Quality of compliance plan for SDMWOB participation4Other relevant factors including overall presentation & responsiveness1Current workload and firm capacity5The prioritized recommended order, based on interview performance and the weighted scoring criteria, is the following:1. Whiting-Turner and Holt Brothers (W-T & H).2. Brasfield and Gorrie.3. Barnhill Contracting Company.Whiting-Turner and Holt Brothers (W–T &H) stood out during the interview process and were ranked at the top of the list of the city staff team review based on the following key points:* Whiting-Turner and Holt Brothers (W-T & H) fully understood the complexities of working in tree critical root zones. This was evident by not only including an arborist expert well versed in this area of work but also in how they will educate the staff and subcontractors working onsite to understand the sensitivities and importance of the trees. This portion of their team was well above and beyond the others who were interviewed.* The W-T & H team willingness and commitment to consistently engage the neighbors and have continuous communication with them during the construction process.  Not only a face-to-face interaction but going extra steps (social media, email updates, community briefings).  Additionally, they used an example that included/suggesting bringing students from Moore Square Magnet School on site, when construction is not occurring, as an educational experience.  The team also recognized the importance of all neighbors, including Oak City Outreach Center.  Overall, this portion of their team’s proposal demonstrated their commitment and understanding of the cultural and historical value of the park to the downtown’s success.* The team has an understanding of the project has the ability to unearth archeological and historical remains. They will have a plan and process in place if this is to occur. This includes education with the sub consultants of the possibility and what to do if this should occur.* The team has successfully completed projects in multiple urban environments.* There was strong leadership and understanding between not only the Project Leadership but also in the Field Superintendent level.  The combination of Whiting-Turners national experience and Holt Brothers understanding of the community and cultural/historical importance of the project clearly demonstrated the passion and commitment from their team.Brasfield and Gorrie were ranked second based on the following key points:* Had a communication plan proposal, but not as strong as W-T&H.* Did not propose having an arborist as part of their team in the qualification submittal but did propose it in the interview.* Had a general response plan in case of archeological remains found, but not as strong as W-T&H* Proposed project staff has less direct urban experience than W-T&H.Barnhill Contracting Company was ranked third based on the following key points:* Did not propose having an arborist as part of their team in the qualification submittal but did propose it in the interview.* Did not propose having an archaeologist as part of the team. If remains are discovered, their approach covers the minimum requirements but did not go above that as did W-T & H.* Did not provide a robust communication plan.Overall, the review team felt all three candidates could generally execute the construction process from a technical standpoint. The final recommended ranking was based on interview performance, key skills and knowledge. Whiting-Turner and Holt Brothers demonstrated excellent understanding of construction in and around critical root zones by having an expert on their team, reviewing construction strategies, as well as an educational component for all construction staff. The superintendent of the Whiting-Turner team demonstrated knowledge of project sensitivities, awareness and leadership that excelled above the other teams interviewed. Whiting-Turner and Holt Brothers confirmed the highest focus on limiting downtown disturbances to residents and businesses. This included having point out an understanding of the Transit Station construction happening simultaneously and the higher level of attention, planning and detail required to strive for minimal disturbance during the project.Planner Grayson Maughan presented this item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation slide titled “Water Resource Assessment and Plan Update.”  The slide during this part of the presentation included the following information that she explained further.Using CMAR for Moore Square:  Why Construction Manager at Risk (CMAR)?* Having the contractor engaged early in the process.* An aggressive schedule.* Strong accurate cost estimation and controls.* Work with a contractor that is qualified to work within sensitive tree root zones to protect the established tree canopy of the park.* Have a contractor and subs that are experienced working in an urban environment.* Sensitivity at the effective execution of the Moore Square project.Planner Maughan reminded the Committee that the City Manager notified the City Council of the City’s decision to use a CMAR in January of 2016.Councilor Thompson requested clarification on the projected timeline.  Planner Maughan responded that within the next couple of weeks, the City will receive the 80% drawings from the design team.  She is hopeful to complete any permitting and the 100% design drawings by June or July of 2016, with construction beginning in the Fall of 2016.  Councilor Thompson responded that his questions are regarding the selection process of a contractor.  The Committee is concerned with making sure that the City is spending money wisely.  He added that CMAR contracts are appropriate on higher dollar-level contracts and are usually hired prior to reaching the 80% drawings.  He expressed concerns that the current advanced stage of the design process would affect the value of hiring a CMAR.Councilor Thompson asked about the scoring methods used by the staff review team.  He asked for elaboration on the criteria which states “Completion of Construction Manager ‘at Risk’ projects in which there was little differences between the GMP and final cost.”  Planner Maughan responded that this item was weighted heavily in order to determine if a contractor is able to successfully complete projects within the original projected cost.    Interim Public Works (IPW) Director Rich Kelly added that not only did the City look at when this may have taken place with a contractor’s past jobs, but why.  Councilor Thompson responded that contractors cannot always control change orders from the City, so the data may be skewed.Councilor Thompson asked how the staff review team weighed the “Current workload and firm capacity.”  Planner Maughan responded that the City wants to know if the contractor has the time needed to dedicate to the project.  IPW Director Kelly added that the question is used to determine resources that a contractor is able to bring to a project.  It also allows the City to determine how a contractor would propose to work through a process.Councilor Thompson expressed his appreciation for the work that staff has done and acknowledged that they have the City’s best interest in mind.  He emphasized that the questions he is asking are questions that constituents and other citizens will eventually ask the Council members.Councilor Thompson expressed his concern that the entire staff review group was not present for the interview but still provided a score.  Stating that it is human nature to be influenced, he wants to be absolutely sure that this was the right contracting method for this project.  He added that since there was significant weight placed on having an arborist in the review process, it should have been included in the initial conditions.  Additionally, he believes that it should not be the job of a CMAR to communicate with neighbors in the surrounding area.IPW Director Kelly responded with clarification on the interview process.  All applicants are qualified if they are selected for an interview.  The City is looking to gauge the level of engagement, planning, thoughtfulness, and enthusiasm with their environment.  The quality of the applicant’s application is also taken into account.  He addressed Councilor Thompson’s concern regarding communicating with neighbors and agreed that it should be the responsibility of City staff to develop and implement a communication plan.Councilor Thompson stated that a plan for dealing with any discovered archaeological remains should be the City’s plan, not the responsibility of a CMAR.  IPW Director Kelly responded that a preliminary site evaluation has already been conducted in order to determine what is underground and the City is not looking for a specific plan from a contractor.  The staff review team was looking for how a contractor would respond should they find any items of historical significance.  Planner Maughan added that a contractor’s response to this issue reveals how they would value archaeological findings.Councilor Stephenson expanded on Councilor Thompson’s earlier question, asking why there was a lot of emphasis placed on the inclusion of an arborist if it was not a requirement.  Planner Maughan responded that although having an arborist was not a requirement, the City did identify the importance of preserving trees on the Request for Qualifications (RFQ).  She added that by having an arborist on their team, the contractors showed how much they valued the preservation of trees.  Councilor Stephenson asked why the staff review team did not require applicants to have an arborist.  Planner Maughan responded that the City currently has arborist and soil scientist sub consultants but the inclusion of an arborist on the contractor’s team would add another layer of quality.Councilor Stephenson agreed with Councilor Thompson’s concern that the entire staff review team was not present during the interviews.  Planner Maughan responded that the scoring method determines which applicants will receive an interview and is not used for final rankings.  IPW Director Kelly thanked Councilor Stephenson for his input and understood his concern.  Councilor Gaylord added that any criteria not listed on the original RFQ should not be used for scoring.  IPW Director Kelly responded that everyone was ranked on the same criteria.  Chairperson Crowder agreed and asked City staff to use caution, stating that at no point in the interview process should any criteria be added. Councilor Stephenson asked about the lack of requirement for having an arborist.  Applicants were informed that having an arborist was not a requirement; however, they were ranked on whether or not they had an arborist.  IPW Director Kelly responded that the rankings were based off of W–T &H going above and beyond by bringing an arborist.  From his perspective, the rankings were justified since the RFQ included criteria stating “Experience and expertise with protection and construction in sensitive tree root zones.”  Councilor Gaylord summarized that the scoring methodology used by the staff review team is used to determine the top three applicants.  After the top three are selected, the methodology is set aside and the rankings are based off of the interviews, which is a more subjective approach.Councilor Thompson asked if the sub consultants used by the City are local.  Planner Maughan responded that the arborist and soil scientist are in fact local; however, the City has not hired an archaeological scientist yet.  Councilor Thompson stated that the addition of an arborist is adding more cost since the City already has an arborist.  Planner Maughan responded that gaining an additional arborist with a CMAR will add a layer of beneficial protection to the project.Chairperson Crowder spoke about the added cost of using a CMAR.  She stated that the City is essentially buying defined risk, but has doubts that a CMAR is necessary for this particular project.  IPW Director Kelly responded that the risks aren’t necessarily regarding the construction process, but the schedule and environment.  Moore Square is surrounded by four active roadways with adjacent construction projects.  Councilor Gaylord added that although there is significant complexity to the project, he questions whether or not the risks are substantial enough to justify hiring a CMAR.Chairperson Crowder added that it is important for the City to not fall into a habit of hiring a CMAR for every project, no matter the complexity.  She emphasized that hiring a CMAR adds cost from the taxpayers.  IPW Director Kelly agreed with Chairperson Crowder and stated that the City would not have proposed this item unless it felt strongly that a CMAR needed to be hired.  Councilor Thompson asked IPW Director Kelly if he would consider the Pullen Park project successful.  IPW Director Kelly responded that the project was successful.  Councilor Thompson pointed out that this was not a CMAR project despite having very old trees and asked the Committee to delay this item until the next meeting.  He requested substantial proof on why the City would need to hire a CMAR in this case.  Parks, Recreation and Cultural Resources Development Administrator Stephen stated he would be glad to meet with Councilor Thompson to discuss further.There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved to hold item #15-04 – Moore Square Park Construction Manager at Risk Selection until the next Growth and Natural Resources Committee meeting on May 11, 2016.  The motion was seconded by Councilor Stephenson and carried unanimously 4-0.Item #15-03 – Z-34-13 – Hillsborough Street Conditional Use DistrictThis item was held for further discussion during the April 13, 2016 Growth and Natural Resources Committee.  The recommendation is for the Committee to make any additional conditions or amendments and refer back to the Council for action.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:This is a request to rezone 6.4 acres from Residential-4 and Residential-10 (R-4 & R-10) to Residential-10-Conditional Use (R-10-CU). The request was initially submitted in December, 2013, for Commercial Mixed Use-5 stories-Parking Limited (CX-5-PL). A Valid Statutory Protest Petition was filed by adjacent neighbors in January, 2014. Given potential trip generation, a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) was requested by staff. The applicant amended the request on March 31, 2015 to Residential-10 (General Use); with the reduction in the traffic generation, no new TIA was requested. A new Valid Statutory Protest Petition, though, was filed on April 29, 2015. The request was amended on February 24, 2016, during Planning Commission review, to Residential-10 Conditional Use (R-10–CU). Of the conditions, the first, limiting stormwater runoff, is in response to neighbor concerns regarding the stream which flows across the southwest corner of the site, which has a history of flooding. The second condition stems from staff and Planning Commission note of the site’s location on a section of Hillsborough Street which the Comprehensive Plan identifies as a Transit Emphasis Corridor. The Planning Commission recommends approval of the amended request by unanimous vote. During the Public Hearing of the case on April 5, 2016, discussion considered potential impacts on neighboring properties, centered on stream matters and intensity of possible build-out. A third condition is now offered in response to the request of the Committee for limitations to be placed on exterior building materials.Planner II Doug Hill presented this item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Zoning Case Z-34-23 – Hillsborough Street* Request to rezone 6.4 acres from R-10 & R-4 to R-10-CU.* VSPP filed.Map:  Existing ZoningImages: * Aerial views of site;* View into site from Hillsborough Street;* View west – frontage on Hillsborough Street;* View east – frontage on Hillsborough Street;* Property west of site on Hillsborough Street;* Property east of site on Hillsborough Street;* Single-unit residences east of site on Hillsborough Street; and* Single-unit residences west of site on Singleton Street.Maps:* Area Topography/Drainage;* Stormwater Drainage – northwest side of parcel;* Transitional Protective Yard (TPY):  Wolf Creek Apartments;* Future Land Use Map;* Urban Form Map; and* Future Land Use/Corridors.Proposed Conditions1. Limitations on peak stormwater runoff specified;2. Transit stop easement to be provided; and3. Exterior materials limited.Existing versus Proposed ZoningExisting ZoningProposed ZoningResidential Density (max.):6.63 DU/acre(44 DUs max.)9.94 DU/acre(66 DUs max.)Setbacks (min.):Front:Side:Rear:R-10If Townhouse:10 feet0 or 6 feet20 feetR-4If Detached:20 feet10 feet30 feetIf Townhouse:10 feet0 or 6 feet20 feetRetail Intensity Permitted:(not permitted)(not permitted)Office Intensity Permitted:(not permitted)(not permitted)Comprehensive Plan Analysis* Consistent with Future Land Use Map 9Community Mixed Use); and* Consistent with Urban Form Map (Transit Oriented District, Transit Emphasis Corridor, w/n Transit Stop Half-Mile Buffer).* Consistent policies:o Policy LU 1.2 – Future Land Use Map and Zoning Consistency;o Policy LU 4.8 – Station Area Land Uses;o Policy LU 5.4 – Density Transitions;o Policy LU 6.4 – Bus Stop Dedication; ando Policy LU7.3 – Single Family Lots on Thoroughfares.* Inconsistent policies:  none identified.Outstanding Issues1. Site does not meet Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) maximum block perimeter standard; and2. Sewer and dire flow matters may need to be addressed upon development.RecommendationsPlanning Commission:  Recommends approval by 8-0 vote.* The proposal is consistent with the Future land Use Map, Urban Form Map, and pertinent policies of the Comprehensive Plan.* The proposed rezoning is reasonable and in the public interest.  Conditions exceed Code in addressing stormwater runoff, and support transit use on the Hillsborough Street corridor.* The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area.  Building Type height caps are comparable to those of adjoining properties.  On-site stream course and tree conservation areas will serve to buffer neighboring low-density parcels from site development.West CAC: Reviewed case but deferred vote to neighbor meeting held on January 27, 2016 (Y-7, N-1, Abstain-1); subsequently requested changes would alter tally to Y-2, N-4, Abstain-3.Planner Hill stated there would be an opportunity for additional amendments to be added beyond today’s discussion; however, the deadline, which is the second meeting in May, is quickly approaching.  He mentioned that City stormwater and transportation staff were present to answer any specific questions.Councilor Stephenson asked for clarification regarding the May deadline.  Planner Hill responded that since the public hearing was closed on April 5, 2016, the Council has 30 days (until May 5, 2016) to submit additional conditions.  He clarified that the case could still be considered after this time period; however, no new conditions could be added.Chairperson Crowder asked Senior Planner Eric Lamb to address several transportation questions.  She stated that Hillsborough Street is a very busy road and voiced concern that areas of ingress and egress would be potentially placed too close together.  Planner Lamb responded that the subject property has exclusive frontage on Hillsborough Street and is entitled to a driveway.  If the City denied the property owners a driveway, that would be considered inverse condemnation.  The subject property has just over 300 feet of frontage which meets City spacing requirements.  Councilor Thompson asked if the state would have any say on driveway placement since Hillsborough Street is a state-owned road.  Planner Lamb responded that the state would have a say.Chairperson Crowder confirmed that there would only be one driveway for 66 townhomes.  Planner Lamb stated that this is consistent with the City code, which states 150 dwelling units are needed in order to require a second point of access.  He added that based on the unique aspects of  the property, which are that areas to the east are substantially developed, areas to the west are commercial, and areas to the south are single-family residential, that this property would be a good candidate for an exception to this 300-foot rule due to the size and geometry of the lot.  This would be a design exception subject to approval by the Public Works Director since it relates to environmental restraints.Chairperson Crowder asked for a second explanation of the 300-foot rule from Planner Lamb.  He responded that under previous City code, a property could have up to 800 feet for a dead end street lane.  Under the new UDO the City wanted to cut down on the length and number of cul-de-sacs to allow for more urban development.  He reemphasized that in this case, there are unique issues which may warrant consideration for a design exception.	Planner Lamb mentioned an issue regarding block perimeter standards.  He pointed out an adjacent property that is also owned by the applicant.  The UDO creates a restriction that does not allow for an access point from a multi-family unit housing to be placed on a residential street.Councilor Stephenson discussed the impacts of high volume storm events on the surrounding well and septic systems.  Chairperson Crowder asked Stormwater Program Manager (SPM) Blair Hinkle to speak on the topic.  SPM Hinkle stated that he could not speak on the issue; however, the applicant’s stormwater engineer may be able to assist.Principal Engineer Nicole Toma Townsend, of Toma Varnedoe Construction, LLC, 400 Asheville Drive, Suite 200, Cary, NC 27518, stated that the stormwater engineer was not present at today’s meeting; however, he did provide speaking points for her to present.Chairperson Crowder clarified the three issues that still need to be addressed, which are the potential for a volumetric study, cross access connection, and information regarding surrounding sewer and wells.  Engineer Townsend read the following statement on behalf of the stormwater engineer:Unfortunately at this stage there is not a real way to quantify the impacts that the 22 additional units would have on the septic tanks and wells. As previously stated, the neighboring properties’ septic systems being in flood prone soils and the fact that our site only accounts for 5% of their total watershed, the impact to their existing septic systems would me marginal, if any at all.  There is no real correlation between density and impervious area because you can add density with multiple stories and maintain the same impervious footprint.  In other words, if you build up versus building the currently allowed single-family homes, you can actually end up with more impervious area and ultimately impact their septic systems and wells even more.  The increased stormwater pond and the open space requirements associated with R-10 zoning could significantly decrease the impervious area from the current zoning.  Furthermore, the existing zoning would not require the additional stormwater controls, which will help minimize our impacts to the adjacent properties.Councilor Thompson confirmed that the applicant’s stormwater engineer is a licensed North Carolina engineer.  Chairperson Crowder asked, as previously discussed, if the applicant would be willing to complete a volumetric study.  Engineer Townsend responded that for this size site, it is difficult to address both a volumetric study and a 25-year stormwater event due to the large footprint, which would not be effective for the developers.Councilor Gaylord commented that in order to do volumetric study, the developer would need to have a baseline assumption, or an existing development.  He pointed out that the stormwater engineer is correct in stating that density does not equal impervious area.  Engineer Townsend responded that impervious area is what will have the biggest impact on the neighboring septic systems and wells.  She added that if the Committee would rather the applicant complete a volumetric study versus a 25-year stormwater event that is possible; however, the City does not currently have standards and those would need to be clearly defined.Councilor Gaylord summarized the variables at hand, which are number of units (which have an impact on traffic), stormwater events, and additional aesthetic protections.  The two options are increased traffic with better aesthetics and stormwater controls or increased traffic with potentially worse aesthetics and lessened stormwater controls.Councilor Stephenson asked for clarification on impervious area.  SPM Hinkle responded that impervious area percentages are determined through stormwater management.  The root cause of stormwater runoff increase is additional impervious area.  He spoke on the differences between a 10-year and 25-year stormwater event.  When Chairperson Crowder asked for his professional opinion, SPM Hinkle responded that he is a fan of green infrastructure.  When looking at stream health in the City, the biggest goal is to retain stormwater runoff volume for smaller events.Stormwater Review Manager (SRM) Ben Brown stated that per City code, if there was a 90th percentile stormwater event, the applicant would still need to follow a two and 10-year retention.  The rezoning of this case would not take away this code requirement. Councilor Gaylord asked if removing the 25-year restriction, which is a signed condition, would be allowed.  Planner Hill responded that following the public hearing, conditions can only be more restrictive.  Councilor Stephenson asked SRM Brown what a 90% retention would look like.  SRM Brown responded that essentially, this type of event would be taking stormwater runoff and infiltrating it into the ground so it does not leave the site.  He mentioned that the area has soil that is mostly comprised of clay, which will present difficulties for large storms.  90% retention means that storms producing 1.7 inches or less of water would be soaked into the ground.  A traditional green infrastructure approach would include the use of small devices throughout the site, rather than one large infiltration device.Chairperson Crowder stated that the case is difficult.  Now that she understands the difference between the stormwater events, the two and 10-year stormwater events seem like a better option.  Unfortunately, since the public hearing has already taken place, the Council cannot amend the conditions to reflect this.There being no other questions, Councilor Thompson moved for denial of item Z-34-13 Hillsborough Street Conditional Use in order for the Council to make a decision at their May 3, 2016 meeting.  The motion was seconded by Chairperson Crowder and was carried by a vote of 3-1, with Councilor Gaylord voting against the motion.Councilor Gaylord stated that although he was okay with sending this case back to Council for a decision, the main issue is regarding stormwater.  The proposed zoning is more beneficial to the area than existing zoning.Item #15-06 – Z-3-16 – Forestville Road Conditional Use DistrictThis item was referred to the Growth and Natural Resources Committee during the April 19, 2016 City Council meeting.  The following description/summary was contained in the agenda packet:This is a request to rezone 18.26 acres from Residential-4 (R-4) to Residential Mixed Use-3 Stories-Conditional Use (RX-3-CU). The request was initially submitted in December, 2015. A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) was not requested by staff. The Conditions were offered to mitigate potential impacts of the rezoning and to address concerns of the property owners to the south of the site. The case was referred to the Planning Commission Committee of the Whole, at which time neighboring property owners brought forth concerns regarding construction on the site as well as the ultimate use. The Planning Commission recommends approval of the amended request by unanimous vote, 10-0. During the Public Hearing of the case on April 19, 2016, discussion considered potential impacts on neighboring properties, centered on traffic impacts, stormwater, and the potential impacts of a potential use of the site for affordable, or “workforce,” housing.Chairperson Crowder asked for a show of hands for anyone present that would like to speak on this topic.  For fairness to both sides, she allotted 8 speaking minutes, collectively, to each side.  She recommended for both sides to discuss how they will allot these minutes prior to speaking.Planner II Charles Dillard presented this item with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Zoning Case Z-3-16 – Forestville Road* Request to rezone 9.41 acres from R-4 to RX-3-CU (Conditional Use).  Map:  Adopted Zoning* East side of subject property is currently zoned R-4 and undeveloped.* North side of subject property is zoned for a planned development.* West side of subject property is zoned as commercial mixed use with three stories and parkway frontage and is currently developed with a shopping center.* South side of subject property is a residential subdivision named Braefield that was constructed in 2005.Image:  Aerial ViewPlanner Dillard pointed out that although the development is not showing up on the aerial view, there is an apartment complex to the southwest corner of the subject property.Images:* View east on Forestville Road;* View southeast on Forestville Road;* View north on Oak Marsh Drive; and* View north on Forestville Road.Maps:* Future Land Use; and* Urban Form.He stated that the City has received several concerns from the property owners in Braefield regarding the extension of Oak Marsh Drive should the development move forward.  The proposal is inconsistent with the Future Land Use map because it would provide entitlements of up to 10.84 units per acre.  The Comprehensive Plan recommends density of no more than 6 units per acre in low density residential areas. Map:  Forestville Village Area Plan* Provides transportation recommendations for the area; and* Shows a proposed street network, which includes an eastward extension of Oak Marsh Drive.Map:  Raleigh Street PlanProposed Conditions1. Prohibits office and retail uses;2. Limits residential development to 100 units;3. Requires that all lights in parking areas be full cut-off with a maximum pole height of 20 feet;4. Dedicates transit easement upon building permit issuance or recordation of subdivided lot;5. Provides site arrangements and pedestrian accommodations for any future signalized crossing of Forestville Road, subject to NCDOT approval;6. Limits construction work to between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday and prohibits construction on weekends and federal holidays;7. Establishes the following conditions with respect to 13 adjacent properties to the south;a. Requires that during construction, al construction-related dumpsters must be located no closer than 20 0feet from adjacent residential properties to the south;b. Requires that during construction, all portable toilets must be located no closer than 200 feet from adjacent residential properties to the south;c. Requires that during construction, a temporary 6-foot screening fence must be erected along the property’s southern boundary;d. Requires that service areas be located at least 300 feet from properties to the south;e. Prohibits principal accessory buildings within 50 feet of adjacent properties to the south; andf. Requires evergreen plantings and 6.5 feet vinyl fence along properties to the south.8. In the event public right of way is required to be dedicated to extend Oak Marsh Drive only to that parcel to the property’s eastern boundary line adjacent to that property identified in that deed recorded in Book 16070, Page 262, Wake County Registry, then the fence required in above Condition 7.f. shall be extended along the property’s frontage of the future right-of-way of the extension of Oak Marsh Drive to the property’s eastern boundary line adjacent to that property identified in that deed recorded in Book 16070, Page 262, Wake County Registry, but outside any front or side street setback area or Zone A neighborhood transition area.  However, in the alternative event public right-of-way for the extension of Oak Marsh Drive is required to be dedicated along the property’s eastern boundary line (providing a north/south street), then this fence shall be extended north along this future public right-of-way for a distance of at least 100 feet from the eastern terminus of the fence, but in any case past any portion of an above-ground stormwater detention facility located within 100 feet from the Adjacent Properties or the future public right-of-way in the southeast portion of the property;9. The peak stormwater leaving the site for the 2-year, 10-year, and 25-year storms all be no greater at every point of discharge for post-development conditions than pre-development conditions; and10. For any development in excess of four units per acre or for any development that includes an apartment building type, such development must provide the following amenities: (i) a community building at least 1,200 square feet in floor area, (ii) a playground area at least 900 square feet in area that includes playground equipment, and (iii) a covered pavilion or shelter measuring at least 375 square feet in area.  These amenities shall be constructed prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for any apartment building.Existing versus Proposed ZoningExisting ZoningProposed ZoningResidential Density:3.93 units per acre10.64 units per acreSetbacks:Front:Side:Rear:*Detached House20’10’30’*Assuming Apartment Bldg.10’0’ or 6’20’Retail Intensity Permitted:Not PermittedNot PermittedOffice Intensity Permitted:Not PermittedNot PermittedComprehensive Plan Analysis* Inconsistent with Future Land Use Map (Low Density Residential).* Consistent policies:o Policy LU 2.6 – Zoning and Infrastructure Impacts;o Policy LU 5.4 – Density Transitions;o Policy H 1.2 0- Geographic Dispersal of Affordable Units;o Policy H 1.8 – Zoning for Housing;o Policy UD 5.1 – Contextual Design; ando Policy AP-FV-7 – Forestville Village East Core and Transition Areas.RecommendationsPlanning Commission recommends approval by 10-0 vote.1. The proposal, though inconsistent with the Future Land Use Map, is consistent with pertinent policies of the Comprehensive Plan.2. The proposed zoning is reasonable and in the public interest.  The proposal would allow for residential development only.3. The proposal is compatible with the surrounding area.  Conditions provide a range of measures to mitigate impacts on adjacent and surrounding uses, including limits on uses, placement of structures and service areas, placement and intensity of light poles, height and materiality of fencing, vegetative buffers, and restrictions on construction times and service areas, including dumpsters and temporary toilet facilities.4. The proposal includes conditions that will provide transit and pedestrian amenities upon request by State and City staff.Forestville CAC opposes proposal (Y-0, N-3 on February 8, 2016).Councilor Stephenson asked if there will be an opportunity for full movement access on Forestville Road versus using some sort of “right-in-right-out” median divider.  Planner Dillard responded that it will be “right-in-right-out”, meaning drivers headed southward on Forestville Road would need to turn right.  This road is a North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) maintained road and transportation staff has said they would be happy to accommodate any crossing or signaled intersection.  The condition addressing the pedestrian accommodations is relating to this issue; however, the current proposed layout of the road is “right-in-right-out” at the entrance and exit of the site.  Councilor Stephenson recalled hearing that NCDOT would entertain a full movement access in this area.  Planner Dillard stated that NCDOT may do so; however, it has not been finalized.Chairperson Crowder mentioned that a staff member in the Council office lives in the area and thinks the traffic is horrendous and showed a photo.  Planner Lamb responded to Councilor Stephenson’s comment regarding a median, stating that if there is a median already in place it is doubtful that NCDOT would allow for a break in that median.  Planner Lamb clarified the location of the proposed site with the assistance of the Raleigh Street Plan map.Chairperson Crowder confirmed with Planner Dillard that the traffic impact was not significant enough to justify asking the applicant for a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA).   Councilor Stephenson asked for information on the road improvement plans to assist with the traffic congestion.  Planner Lamb responded that there are no current plans.Chairperson Crowder invited the applicant to speak and provided a reminder of the 8-minute time limit per side.Attorney Michael Birch of Morningstar Law Group, 630 Davis Drive, Suite 200, Morrisville, NC 27560, stated that he was speaking on behalf of ReaVentures Group, LLC.  He named several representatives from ReaVentures and the Timmons Group who were present at the meeting.      He touched briefly on the policies of the Forestville Small Area Plan.  This Small Area Plan has been in effect since 2004, which was prior to the large majority of the platting for the Braefield subdivision and prior to the selling of any Braefield homes.  In fact, this area has been designated as a transition area since that time, which includes desired uses of apartments, offices, and retail.  For this reason, Attorney Birch believes this is an appropriate transition area from the adjacent commercial lot to the single family residential area to the south.  In addition to being consistent with the Small Area Plan and its vision for apartments, this proposed development is also consistent with the Council’s priority of providing affordable housing and the City’s Scattered Site Policy for affordable housing.  The proposal includes enhanced buffers, setbacks, fencing, stormwater detention, and needed pedestrian signaling.  Attorney Birch then asked Sean Brady, Vice President of Development at ReaVentures Group, LLC, to speak regarding the specifics of workforce housing.Sean Brady, 2964 Peachtree Road, Suite 200, Atlanta, GA 30305, briefly provided some information about ReaVentures Group, LLC.  This company is the developer and long term owner of over 4,100 properties from Texas to North Carolina.  Due to the nature of the program, ReaVentures does not have the ability to “flip” and sell properties.  He mentioned a meeting had taken place with the neighbors last night and wanted to touch on some of the concerns that were voiced.  He then presented his information with the assistance of a PowerPoint presentation.  Sides during this part of the presentation included the following information that he explained further.Preliminary Concept:  Abbington Village Apartments* 100 units of multi-family housing.o Garden-style apartments (3-story).o Townhomes (2-story).o Financed with Housing Tax Credit equity, competitively allocated by North Carolina Housing Finance Agency (NCHFA).o Housing Type: Workforce Housing.*Market rate development with caps on allowable rents, no subsidies).o Unit types: 1-bedroom (20), 2-bedroom (50), 3-bedroom (30).* Professionally managed by Boyd Management.* Unit & site amenities.* Supportive services.Community Benefits* Rent control allows workforce to be less rent burdened and save/spend more in local economy, vehicle, future home ownership, college, etc.* Jobs and investment:o 2-4 jobs full-time;o 150-170 jobs in construction; ando $4.7 million in construction taxable investment.* Taxes and fees:o Property taxes (add $9 million to tax base);o Permitting and utility fees; ando Ongoing water and sewer usage revenue.Boyd Management* In business since 1984;* Manage 15,500 units across 5 states;* On-site staff (management & maintenance);* Professional landscaping and maintenance;* Residents screened (criminal, background, income, etc.) and can be evicted; and* Regular oversight.o Monthly unit inspections (Boyd);o Annual site inspection (ReaVentures – owner);o Annual site inspection (Investor); ando Annual site inspection (State – NCHFA).Table:  Income Levels and Housing ProgramsMr. Brady mentioned that ReaVentures has been meeting with neighbors since January; however, many neighbors did not receive the information despite informing the homeowners association.  There were over 100 neighbors, about half from the Braefield subdivision, in attendance last night.  ReaVentures was not able to address all of the questions at this meeting and there was a Council Member in attendance to represent the citizens.  He addressed several questions from the previous night, which included workforce versus subsidized housing.  Mr. Brady clarified that this proposed development is workforce housing, not subsidized housing.  He showed a table with information on the demand in the market area.  The families living in these apartments would be working families and the demand is high.  He provided statistics relating to rent and mortgage burdened residents in the area.Mr. Brady presented a table of information relating to the rent and income qualification process that showed the maximum annual incomes and the rental rates.  Qualifying residents for this development will earn anywhere from $33,000 to $55,000 per year and could potentially qualify to purchase a home anywhere from $163,000 to $270,000, which is more than many of the homes in the Braefield subdivision are worth.  In fact, a Braefield resident mentioned her interest in moving into these apartments.He then presented information on the typical careers of residents in workforce housing.  The careers include teachers, police officers, restaurant, and retail workers.  Lastly he stated that property values would increase and crime would decrease after the development of these apartments.Councilor Thompson asked if ReaVentures is required to own the properties for an extended amount of time.  Mr. Brady responded that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) enforces the program and the ownership requirement is 30 years.Chairperson Crowder invited the opposing side to speak for 8 minutes.Braefield Home Owners Association (HOA) president Donna Dematteo, 8214 Willowglen Drive, made her statement on behalf of all Braefield residents present at today’s meeting.  Although she was appreciative of the developers meeting with the neighbors, the residents believe this project will cause harm to the Braefield subdivision for the following reasons:* The 3-story height of the proposed development.  The neighbors do not think this will blend in with the surrounding areas.* Despite the nice conceptual drawing, she believes that ReaVentures will have the power to make the building look however they please should this parcel be rezoned.* The low credit score requirement for residents.  The neighborhood has a desire to see the requirement reach 600.* The potential for the developer to not follow through on promises.* The tight right-of-way access for fire and Emergency Medical Services.* Increased traffic in an already highly congested area.* Interference with a community area that Braefield uses for neighborhood events.* The potential for flooding and water issues.* The proposed density is too high.* The comparisons to other states is not fair.  In summary, Ms. Dematteo stated that the neighbors want any new development to serve as a benefit to the neighborhood.  She is concerned that when the developers were asked how this would benefit their neighborhood, they could not provide an answer.  She feels as though her single family neighborhood is becoming overpowered by apartments.  There is a concern that prospective buyers will not want to purchase Braefield homes due to traffic and already overcrowded schools.Councilor Stephenson asked the applicant to respond to the high density of residents and the Area Median Income (AMI) level.  Attorney Birch responded that he comment on the height and traffic concerns as they relate to density.  Mr. Brady would respond on the qualifications of prospective residents.Attorney Birch stated that from a height standpoint, the developer has increased the setback from the property line and increased shade trees as a buffer.  Concerns with building height were heard by the developers for the first time last night.  ReaVentures has agreed to limit the height to two stories within a certain distance from the neighboring Oak Marsh Drive properties.  He then showed a trip generation comparison between the current zoning and the addition of 100 apartment units.  There would be an increase of 17 trips during the morning peak hour and 30 during the afternoon, which are marginal impacts.  He added that although the applicant did not have information to present at last night’s meeting, the property values have increased in other similar neighborhoods due to the development of affordable housing apartments.Chairperson Crowder asked where the parking lot would be located in relation to Marsh Creek Road.  Referencing the “Planned Connectivity” slide, Attorney Birch presented the site plan that was presented to the state.  The site plan includes a six and a half foot privacy fence, followed by six-foot evergreen understory trees, 10-foot evergreen shade trees, and then a parking area.  The parking lot will include limited lighting, as stated in the conditions.Mr. Brady stated that all residents will be required to participate in a full background check and credit score check.  The credit score check process utilizes a combination of credit score, eviction history, late utility payment history, past foreclosures, and more.  All of these factors are combined into a rental risk rating.  Councilor Thompson asked who determines these factors and ratings.  Mr. Brady responded that the property management company is responsible.  Although the state is looking at income qualifications, the developers look more at risks.  Each resident is required to earn an income of at least three times the monthly rent.Mr. Brady spoke on the concern from neighbors relating to property value.  He stated that ReaVentures has found that surrounding property values increase consistently.  One of the developments looked at was Brighton Village, which is another neighboring low-income development, and the same trend was apparent.  He then encouraged neighbors and the Committee to look at other projects ReaVentures has completed.  Crime in ReaVentures development neighborhoods has been significantly low.Councilor Stephenson stated that Councilor Cox attended the neighborhood meeting last night, where 121 neighbors opposed the development.  He wants to respond to that level of concern.  Councilor Gaylord was glad the community was able to attend the meeting; however, the Committee cannot use this information objectively and as a barometer since it is not within the City’s process.Chairperson Crowder asked for clarification that the development would contain the following:* 70% 1-2 bedrooms;* Onsite property manager;* 2-story height limit on the Oak Marsh Drive side;* 50-foot setback; and* Tree plantings along the fence line.Attorney Birch confirmed this and stated that in addition to these buffers, there is a 30-foot protective yard along the backside of all property lines, which was put in place prior to tree conservation efforts.  The City code requires a minimum of a six and a half-foot fence and a maximum of nine feet.  Any structures would be built a minimum of 50-feet from the common property line.  Councilor Gaylord asked about the backyards of the neighboring residents.  Attorney Birch responded that the back yards contain heavy vegetation.Councilor Stephenson asked if there would be any flexibility for reduced height units.  Attorney Birch stated that as mentioned earlier, the developers are willing to commit to a 2-story height limit on the Oak Marsh Drive side.When asked which company provides leasing services, Attorney Birch named Boyd.  He added that they actively pursue police officers and other security workers as residents and hire staff locally.Chairperson Crowder asked Ms. Dematteo to speak.  Ms. Dematteo expressed her appreciation for the information presented by the developers.  She disagrees with the data relating to property values because she believes the market has improved everywhere.  She restated that having an apartment complex with 100 units could affect the neighborhood in a negative way.  She added that the development of the complex across the street was not a positive experience because of the construction process and lack of communication.  She stated that neighbors have not received notification.  The neighbors would like a development that would help them grow.  When asked for a specific example by Councilor Gaylord, Ms. Dematteo responded that she could not provide one.  Councilor Gaylord asked about the wooded area behind the neighboring property along Oak Marsh Drive.Councilor Stephenson expressed his appreciation for the discussion.  He summarized what the applicant has agreed upon and agreed with Councilor Gaylord that the voting at last night’s neighborhood meeting was not sanctioned and therefore could not be considered in the Committee’s process.  If the Future Land Use map does not recommend zoning for multi-family, the burden is on the applicant to mitigate the impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.Chairperson Crowder clarified the state application deadline, which is May 13, 2016.  This leaves a decision for the Council on May 3, 2016 since they will not meet again until after the deadline.  She stated that more conversation needs to happen with the neighbors.Councilor Gaylord stated that there are a number of conditions discussed today that would mitigate several of the neighbor’s concerns.  With these conditions and the consideration of the great need for affordable housing in the community, he moved approval of item #15-06 – Z-3-16 Forestville Road Conditional Use District.  The motion was seconded by Chairperson Crowder.Councilor Stephenson expressed his concern with the lack of the developer’s discussion with the neighbors and stated that he could not support that motion.  Councilor Gaylord’s motion failed.  Councilor Thompson added that he believes the density is too high and would like to see that number decrease.There being no other questions or comments, Councilor Thompson moved to send item #15-06 – Z-3-16 Forestville Road Conditional Use District with no recommendation from the Growth and Natural Resources Committee to Council for their consideration at their May 3, 2016 meeting.  The motion was seconded by Chairperson Crowder and carried unanimously 4-0.Adjournment.  There being no further business, Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting adjourned at 4:59 p.m.Cassidy R. PritchardAssistant Deputy Clerk	Growth and Natural Resources Committee		April 27, 2016Page 2 of 22