GROWTH AND NATURAL RESOURCES COMMITTEEThe Growth and Natural Resources Committee of the City of Raleigh met in regular session on Wednesday, January 27, 2016, at 2:00 p.m. in the City Council Chamber, Room 201, Raleigh Municipal Building, 222 West Hargett Street, Avery C. Upchurch Government Complex, Raleigh, North Carolina, with the following present:Committee							StaffChairperson Kay C. Crowder, Presiding		Deputy City Attorney Ira BotvinickCouncilor Bonner Gaylord				Senior Planner Bynum WalterCouncilor Russ Stephenson				Planner II Doug HillCouncilor Dickie Thompson				Senior Planner/Transportation Todd DelkAssistant Planning Director Travis CraneThese are summary minutes unless otherwise indicated.Chairperson Crowder called the meeting to order and the following item was discussed.Item #15-01 – Z-39-15 – Trailwood Drive Conditional Use District.  During the January 19, 2016 City Council meeting this item was referred to the Committee at the request of Chairperson Crowder.  Senior Planner Bynum Walter summarized the history of the rezoning request indicating the Planning Commission discussed this request in December 2015 and recommended the matter be deferred for further discussion.  She stated the Petitioner had since reduced the proposed maximum building height from 5 stories to 4, at which time the Planning Commission voted 7 – 3 to recommend approval and schedule a public hearing.  She indicated there was a time limit with regard to scheduling the public hearing in that the Council has 60 days from the date the item is presented to Council to schedule the hearing.  In response to questions, Ms. Walter stated the 60-day period started when the item was presented at the Council’s January 19, 2016 meeting.Planner II Doug Hill reviewed the current request before the Committee and pointed out the subject property’s location on a map included in the agenda packet.  He talked about the proposed use as well as current surrounding uses.  He pointed out there are plans to locate a re-use water tower on a lot across Trailwood Drive from the subject property, and indicated the zoning for the nearby North Carolina State University property will have a 5-story building height limit.  He also talked about the proposed sidewalk improvements along Trailwood Drive.Chairperson Crowder requested photographs of the section of Trailwood Drive from the subject property northward to Avent Ferry Road with Planner Hill indicating Planner Todd Delk will have those photos available during his portion of the presentation.Mr. Hill went on to talk about area topography noting existing buffers will affect area connectivity and that primary access to the subject property would be onto Trailwood Drive.  He reviewed the proposed conditions which included proposed maximum density of 14 units per acre, dedication and recording a transit easement, etc.  He stated staff concluded the proposed rezoning is consistent with the Future Land Use Map (FLUM) and indicated staff noted there were issues that included block perimeter and connectivity, sewer and fire flow matters, etc.  He indicated the local CAC did not favor the proposed conditions.  Chairperson Crowder questioned the how the CAC voted with Planner Hill responding the original vote was 27 – 0 against the proposal.  He noted the CAC took a second vote on the matter and, in response to questions, indicated the voted on January 19, 2016 22 – 0 in opposition to the request.Mr. Thompson questioned the composition of the units with regard to the number of bedrooms in each unit with Planner Hill responding that information is not normally taken into consideration during staff review.Chairperson Crowder indicated she had the item referred to Committee a she had concerns regarding transportation issues on Trailwood Drive; especially the 2-lane section of Trailwood Drive northward from the subject property to Avent Ferry Road.  Mr. Stephenson requested clarification that there were 3 dissenting votes on the Planning Commission with Planner Hill indicated that is correct.  Mr. Stephenson questioned the reason for the dissenting votes with Senior Planner Walter responding the votes were in response to concerns expressed by the neighbors to the north of the subject property as well as Planning Commission members’ concerns with regard to locating student housing at such a distance from NCSU.  Mr. Stephenson questioned whether any infrastructure was included in the Trailwood plan with Senior Planner Todd Delk responding there are plans to add sidewalks on Trailwood Drive to Lineberry Drive, the replacement of the Trailwood Drive bridge at Walnut Creek, as well as a greenway and pedestrian bridge over to Lake Raleigh.  He indicated the sidewalk improvements would take place on Trailwood Drive within the City limits; however, he does not know of plans by NCDOT to improve Trailwood Drive outside the City limits.Discussion took place regarding the proposed greenway project.Chairperson Crowder questioned whether there were any improvements planned for the section of Trailwood Drive northward to Avent Ferry Road with Planner Delk indicating there were no improvements planned at this time for the portion of Trailwood Drive from Thistledown Drive northward to Avent Ferry Road.  He went on to present photographs of the 2-lane section of Trailwood Drive and pointed out the proposed locations for the greenway and pedestrian bridge to Lake Raleigh with Mrs. Crowder questioning the distance from the end of the proposed sidewalk to the greenway and Planner Delk estimating the distance to be 1.5 to 2 miles.Mr. Stephenson expressed concern regarding adding car trips onto Trailwood Drive and cited City policy requiring adequate infrastructure in place for future development.Discussion took place regarding proposed traffic counts for Trailwood Drive with Planner Delk indicating the Planning Commission or City Council could request a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA).  Discussion also included traffic impacts on 2-lane versus 4-lane roads as well as proposed traffic impact at the Trailwood Drive/Avent Ferry Road intersection.Chairperson Crowder indicated her concern regarded the property’s sole access onto Trailwood Drive and that students living at the proposed complex would use Avent Ferry Road as the fastest route to campus; and therefore believes there is inadequate infrastructure in place to accommodate the additional traffic volume.Discussion took place regarding calculating the maximum land use capacity as well as a.m./p.m. peak traffic counts for Trailwood Drive and Tryon Road.Chairperson Crowder requested clarification that the number of apartment units did not take into account the number of bedrooms per unit with Planner Delk indicating that is correct.  Discussion took place regarding how the number of parking spaces on the property depended on the number of bedrooms in the complex.Mr. Stephenson requested additional information regarding the Tree Conservation Area (TCA) locations with Planner Hill indicating the Petitioner will be providing that information.  Discussion took place regarding TCA locations in regard to “build-to” regulations with Mr. Stephenson questioning the possibility of imposing a frontage restriction as a condition of approval and Deputy City Attorney Ira Botvinick pointing out a no-build SHOD of 50 feet exists from the right-of-way I-40/440 along the southern property line.Planner Delk noted the distance from Thistledown Road to Avent Ferry Road was approximately 1 mile.Attorney Lacy Reaves, 150 Fayetteville Street, representing the Petitioner, acknowledged everyone wants to preserve the trees along Trailwood Drive.  He talked about discussions taking place at the Planning Commission and CAC meetings and, as a result, his client wishes to propose further modifications to the rezoning request.  Tony Tate, Landscape Architect, 5011 Southpark Drive, Durham, NC, talked about efforts to bring the proposed conditions into compliance with the Future Land Use Map (FLUM) as well as in response to neighbors’ and Planning Commission’s concerns.  He presented a graphic illustration outlining the proposed TCA’s as well as proposed property access onto Trailwood Drive.  He indicated he client proposes Parkway Frontage would be the best solution to save existing trees, and summarized the proposed conditions to include the following: 	1) 	4-story building height maximum,	2)	Residential use only, 	3)	Dedicated transit easement	4)	TCA’s along Trailwood Drive, and	5)	No more than 50% of the apartment units would have 4 bedrooms.Chairperson Crowder requested information regarding the number of bedrooms for the remaining units.Mr. Tate talked about future median locations along Trailwood Drive indicating where the median breaks are located may affect the number of access points from the property.  Mr. Thompson questioned whether the number of proposed apartment units would be 67 rather than the original 78 with Mr. Tate responding in the affirmative.  Discussion took place regarding the possible number of trips per day (TPD) generated by the proposed project with Attorney Reaves suggesting with the reduced number of apartment units proposed the TPD would increase approximately 3%.Chairperson Crowder pointed out there is no Wolfline service in the area and that the nearest CAT bus stop was about a 20 minute walk.  She reiterated her concern that there is not enough street infrastructure to accommodate the proposed complex when NCSU would not invest in extending Wolfline service to the area.  She suggested the Petitioner obtain a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) for the project and indicated a TIA would help alleviate the neighbors’ concerns.Mr. Thompson questioned whether the Petitioner approached NCSU regarding providing Wolfline service to the area with Attorney Reaves indicating his client will enter into discussions with NCSU as well as CAT regarding the possibility of providing service to the area.  He went on to point out the reason there has been no service in the past was due to the lack of riders in the area.Mr. Gaylord pointed out there is existing CAT service nearby with a 30-minute peak interval service.Chairperson Crowder indicated she would need to see a TIA to better address concerns.  Discussion took place regarding whether a TIA would provide the needed information for Council to consider the application with Mrs. Crowder reiterating her preference to get a TIA from the Petitioner as well as a real configuration of the apartment units with the number of bedrooms.Attorney Reaves suggested the Committee may report the item out with no action taken and that his Client may present a report to the full Council.  Chairperson Crowder questioned whether it was all right to have the Petitioner report back to the Committee with Deputy City Attorney Botvinick responding in the affirmative.Discussion took place regarding when the Petitioner should bring a report back to the Committee with Chairperson Crowder questioning the amount of time required to conduct a comprehensive TIA and Planner Delk responding it would take approximately 4 weeks to conduct a comprehensive analysis.  Chairperson Crowder questioned whether 4 weeks would be adequate for the Petitioner obtain a complete TIA with Attorney Reaves expressing his belief his client would be able to provide adequate information without a full TIA.  Mrs. Crowder stated she would still prefer a full TIA.Discussion took place regarding TCA’s in Parkway Frontage with Assistant Planning Director Travis Crane indicating staff is not prepared at this point to state whether the Petitioner’s proposed TCA’s meet the Parkway Frontage requirements noting the amount of TCA would depend on such issues as pedestrian access, etc.Mr. Tate indicated the Petitioner’s graphic was created to show possible TCA’s.  He used an aerial photograph of the subject property to point out existing trees on the property noting there are portions of the property along Trailwood Drive that do not have trees; therefore there may be some trees planted to create a TCA.  Mr. Stephenson questioned whether the Petitioner was proposing a condition of having Parkway Frontage along Trailwood Drive with Mr. Tate responding in the affirmative.  Mr. Stephenson questioned whether the Petition would also consider a condition to build a transit shelter at the existing bus stop with Mr. Gaylord pointing out the bus stop was located off-site, and Deputy City Attorney Botvinick indicating it would depend on whether the bus stop was located within the right-of-way or in a dedicated easement.Following further discussion, it was agreed to hold the item in Committee for further discussion.Adjournment.  There being no further business, Chairperson Crowder announced the meeting adjourned at 3:08 p.m.Ralph L. PucciniAssistant Deputy Clerk	Growth and Natural Resources Committee		January 27, 20165